1
HPI SEC & 
SSER
Patient safety measurement 
system for healthcare

2
The healthcare industry has continued 
in recent years to focus more attentively 
on patient safety. Specific actions of 
necessity include the necessity to measure 
improvement and identify performance 
benchmarks.
While healthcare holds healing without 
harm as its core value, we still lack a 
consistent nationally accepted method 
to measure performance against this 
promise. Several patient safety event 
taxonomies have emerged in past years, 
yet these category-based classifications 
do not provide a universally recognized 
means of consistently measuring the 
harm that results from safety events. This 
lack of a standard definition of patient 
harm leads organizations to use disparate, 
subjective determinations that require 
significant interpretation which add to the 
shortcomings already identified.1, 2, 3
Concern about these issues was first 
voiced at the 2006 HPI Safety Summit, 
an annual gathering of organizations 
engaged with Healthcare Performance 
Improvement (HPI) in safety culture 
improvement. These client organizations 
expressed the need for a reliable 
outcome measure for patient safety that 
can be used to appropriately measure 
performance within an individual site of 
care in an organization and by comparing 
progress to zero harm across an 
organization or between organizations on 
the same journey.
In response, Safety Event Classification 
(SEC®) and the Serious Safety Event Rate 
(SSER®) were developed. Safety Event 
Classification provides common definitions 
and an algorithm for the classification of 
safety events. The classification is based 
on the degree of harm that results from 
a deviation from expected performance 
standards. It serves as the foundation for 
the calculation of the Serious Safety Event 
Rate (SSER®), a volume-adjusted measure 
of events resulting in moderate to severe 
harm, including death. 
"As to diseases, make a habit 
of two things: to help, or at 
least to do no harm."
Source: Hippocrates, Of the Epidemics, Book 1, 
Section XI, 400 BC
Executive Summary

3
Together, the SEC® and SSER® provide a 
consistent methodology for measuring 
patient harm and improvement in reducing 
harm. Thousands of hospitals, ambulatory, 
and long-term care sites across the United 
States, Canada and other countries are 
currently using the SEC® and SSER®.
This revision encompasses refinements 
from the 2019 release and also provides 
further clarity and guidance in conducting 
SEC® and using the SSER® as a key 
measure of patient harm. Updates include:
•	
Changes to the Levels of Harm 
(Appendix A) that provide more 
guidance in applying the SEC® process 
to alternative sites of care.
•	
Working with common classification 
challenges (Appendix C), additional 
guidance in addressing questions of 
causation, and applying the Known 
Complications Test.
•	
Focus on other frequently 
encountered issues such as 
Emotional Harm, Unconscious 
Bias and Diagnostic Error.
•	
Safety Event Classification 
Process (Appendix H) guidance 
for organizations to implement an 
effective structure for conducting 
safety classification and monitoring 
of the SSER® on an ongoing basis.
The application of these concepts has 
been expanded in this White Paper 
with distinctions relevant to all sites of 
care from acute to long term care, to 
hospice, home care and ambulatory 
care. The title we give to the person(s) 
for whom we provide care is important. 
When specifically discussing those post-
acute situations, we have purposely and 
respectfully used the term resident or 
client. 
But for efficiency, during the larger 
narrative, the term patient is used to refer 
to the person to whom we provide care 
whatever the site of that care may be.
Revision 5 - October 2022
Revision 4 – December 2020
Revision 3 – October 2019
Revision 2 – May 2011
Revision  1 – December 2009
Revision 0 – May 2009
Executive Summary

4
Past History of Safety 
Event Review and 
Classification
Development of 
HPI Safety Event 
Classification clear data
Recent history of Safety 
Event Review and 
Classification 
Table of contents
High reliability principles 
in Safety Event 
Classification
Assessing for deviations
Assessing for causation
Assessing Outcome to 
the Patient
Additional 
considerations in Safety 
Event Classification
Choosing a 
denominator
Comprehensive capture 
of events
Consistent application 
of the HPI SEC criteria
Practices to support 
Safety Event 
Classification
HPI Safety Event 
Detection Assessment 
survey for hospitals
Application of SSER as a 
safety metric
1. 
Event 
classification 
in healthcare
3. 
HPI Serious 
Safety Event 
Rate (SSER®)
2. 
HPI Safety 
Event 
Classification 
(SEC®)
4. 
Applying 
Patient Safety 
Measurement 
System
Contents

5
1 
Event 
Classification 
in healthcare
Past History of Safety 
Event Review and 
Classification
Development of 
HPI Safety Event 
Classification clear data
Recent history of Safety 
Event Review and 
Classification

6
Past History of Safety Event 
Review and Classification
Since the publication in November 1999 
of the Institute of Medicine report on 
patient safety, To Err is Human, national and 
international organizations have focused 
on mechanisms to describe and classify 
events of harm. Some of these efforts have 
used collaborative approaches to achieve 
consensus on a universal, standardized 
patient safety event classification system. 
Numerous event classification systems have 
emerged, and some organizations have 
begun working together to harmonize, or 
align, existing taxonomies and definitions. 
The Joint Commission, the National 
Quality Forum (NQF) and the World Health 
Organization (WHO) led the initial efforts to 
classify events that cause harm to patients. 

The Joint Commission took the first step 
in 1996 by defining a sentinel event as 
the following:
“any unexpected occurrence 
involving death or serious 
physical or psychological 
injury, or the risk thereof. 
Serious injury specifically 
includes loss of limb or 
function. The phrase, ‘or the 
risk thereof’ includes any 
process variation for which 
a recurrence would carry a 
significant chance of a serious 
adverse outcome. Such events 
are called "sentinel" because 
they signal the need for 
immediate investigation 
and response.”4
In 2002, the National Quality Forum5 
endorsed a set of 27 serious reportable 
events in healthcare, or “never events.” 
To qualify for this core list of serious 
reportable events, an event had to be 
unambiguous, usually preventable, serious, 
and one or more of the following: adverse, 
indicative of a problem in a health care 
facility’s safety systems, or important for 
public credibility or public accountability.6 
Requiring that an event be usually 
preventable recognizes that some of these 
events are not always avoidable, given the 
complexity of healthcare. 
The presence of an event on the list, 
therefore, is not an a priori judgment either 
of a systems failure or lack of 
due care. With new evidence and 
innovation, this initial list of serious 
reportable events was expanded in 
2006 to include 28 events.7
1
Event Classification in 
healthcare

7
In early 2005, the Joint Commission 
developed a Patient Safety Event Taxonomy 
(PSET™).8 The PSET outlined terminology 
and classification schema for near misses 
and adverse events. The goal of the 
Joint Commission PSET was to facilitate 
a common approach for collecting and 
organizing patient safety data. This 
taxonomy was endorsed later that year by 
the NQF as a framework for aggregating, 
classifying, and reporting data for national 
patient safety improvement.
The World Health Organization (WHO) 
established the World Alliance for Patient 
Safety in October 2004. It was the first time 
that health focused agencies, health policy-
makers, and representatives or patients' 
groups and the WHO came together to 
advance the patient safety goal of "First 
do no harm”. They recognized healthcare’s 
current inability to classify, aggregate, and 
compare patient safety information across 
organizations internationally. They began 
working in 2005 on an event classification 
structure. Their goal was to enable 
categorization of patient safety information 
using standardized sets of concepts with 
agreed definitions and preferred terms. In 
January 2009 the WHO published 
the International Classification for Patient 
Safety9 (ICPS). ICPS draws upon the work 
of the Joint Commission's PSET as well as 
other national safety event classifications 
of the United Kingdom, Australia, and the 
Netherlands.
In December 2008, the Department of 
Health and Human Services reported that 
26 states had adverse event reporting 
systems and another state had taken action 
to develop one10. Eleven of the 26 states 
adopted – unaltered or with modifications 
– the NQF list of serious reportable events 
as the foundation for their adverse event 
reporting system, while 15 states use a 
state-generated list.
The Patient Safety and Quality Improvement 
Act of 2005 guided the Department of 
Health and Human Services (HHS) to begin 
the process of creating structure and 
guidance for Patient Safety Organizations 
(PSOs) 11. By conferring privilege and 
confidentiality protections on providers who 
work with listed PSOs, the Act was intended 
to promote shared learning to enhance 
quality and safety nationally. The Agency 
for Health Research and Quality (AHRQ) 
completed this work in 2008 
and organizations began to be 
officially listed as PSOs.
As part of the implementation of PSOs, 
the AHRQ worked with the NQF, a Federal 
Patient Safety Work Group and expert 
panels to create an event reporting 
taxonomy called Common Formats 
for Event Reporting. 
The first version of the Common Formats 
was published in August 2008. Throughout 
the years and with the support of expert 
panels and PSO members, updates were 
released including Version 1.0 in September 
2009 and Version 1.1 in March 2010. Versions 
for specific healthcare settings have been 
subsequently released such as nursing 
homes (2011), hospitals (2014), and 
community pharmacies (2016). The most 
recent release was the Hospital Version 
2.0. in May 2017.12
1
Event Classification in 
healthcare

8
Development of HPI Safety 
Event Classification
 As HPI began its work with healthcare 
organizations around the country it was 
recognized that there was no consistent 
methodology for classification of all 
types of events in all settings. In 2007, HPI 
developed and implemented a standardized 
process for safety event classification 
for all of its client organizations. This 
classification methodology, the Safety 
Event Classification® (SEC) provides 
common definitions and an algorithm for 
the classification of safety events. The 
classification is based on the degree of 
harm that results from a deviation from 
expected performance standards. It serves 
as the foundation for the calculation of 
the Serious Safety Event Rate (SSER)®, 
a volume-adjusted measure of events 
resulting in moderate to severe harm, 
including death. It blended the need to 
standardize the organization of events 
by the level of harm experienced by the 
patient, but classifying them based on 
whether they were indeed preventable 
safety events. They also compiled a 
nationally recognized and/or endorsed 
safety event nomenclatures. The HPI 
Taxonomy of Safety Events in Healthcare, 
the results of examination of the 
compilation, reflected an alignment, or 
harmonization, of various classification 
systems. The first White Paper, The HPI 
SEC & SSER Patient Safety Measurement 
System for Healthcare was published 
May 2009.13
In 2011, an extensive evaluation of the event 
types was conducted and informed from 
internal data analytics. A refined version 
reflected the consequences, rather than 
the causal factors that contributed to the 
event. The refinement logic was based on 
capturing the type of event that the patient 
experienced. The event causal factors are 
more appropriately captured as part of 
the performance of cause analysis that is 
intended to identify the high leverage areas 
for targeted action. These changes and 
others were reflected in an updated White 
Paper in May 2011.14
The SEC® process and the Safety Event 
Taxonomy continues to be periodically 
evaluated for possible updates to reflect 
changes as nationally endorsed safety 
event reporting standards and taxonomies 
continue to evolve. Whenever there is 
a revision, the harmonization, current 
with the publication of this paper, is also 
updated. With the listing of the HPI Press 
Ganey PSO in December 2016, extensive 
experience has also been gained from 
organizations using the SEC.
1
Event Classification in 
healthcare

9
1
Event Classification in 
healthcare
Recent history of Safety 
Event Review Classification 
All of the above-mentioned organizations 
have continued to focus on the subject 
of patient safety event classification 
and review. In some cases, updates 
to taxonomies have occurred. AHRQ 
continues to update their quality and safety 
indicators. The most recent update in 2019 
indicated that 21 Quality Indicators were 
retired for various reasons.15 As part of the 
implementation of the Patient Safety Act of 
2005, AHRQ continues the analysis of their 
Common Formats for hospitals, community 
pharmacies and nursing homes. The most 
recent update to the hospital data set 
occurred in August 2018.16
The Joint Commission continues to update 
their Sentinel Event Policy every 2-3 years. 
In 2016 they updated their definition of 
severe temporary harm to reflect the HPI 
definition of this level of harm.17
In 2015, a diverse coalition of health 
care leaders, the Core Quality Measures 
Collaborative (CQMC) was convened by 
America’s Health Insurance Providers 
(AHIP), the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services (CMS) and the National Quality 
Forum (NQF). They represent over 75 
consumer groups, medical associations, 
health insurance providers, purchasers 
and other quality stakeholders. The 
purpose of the CQMC was to develop and 
recommend sets of core quality measures. 
These measures cover more specific 
clinical settings such as Accountable Care 
Organizations, primary care and patient 
centered medical homes and specific 
clinical topics such as gastroenterology and 
obstetrics and gynecology. They recently 
published the first four of 10 anticipated 
new measure sets.18 
Finally, per a 2014 report, 28 states and the 
District of Columbia now require adverse 
event reporting.19 
Since 2007 and 2016 respectively, HPI and 
the HPI Press Ganey PSO has had extensive 
experience with hundreds of healthcare 
systems and thousands of healthcare 
settings who have used the SEC and 
the SSER as a core component of their 
patient safety program. These experiences 
have provided significant opportunities 
to understand what issues should be 
addressed during the journey to reliable and 
safe patient care. This current White Paper 
update is a reflection of the hard work, the 
questions, and the struggles of all of these 
organizations across the United States and 
the world in the journey toward Zero Harm.

10
2 
HPI Safety Event 
Classification 
(SEC)
High reliability 
principles in Safety 
Event Classification
Assessing for deviations
Assessing for causation
Assessing Outcome to 
the Patient
Additional 
considerations in Safety 
Event Classificatio

11
The goal of excellence in healthcare 
focuses on reducing patient suffering. 
Unfortunate outcomes in healthcare do 
occur. Inherent or unavoidable suffering 
includes the experience related to the 
disease process itself. It can also include 
the known complications of treatments 
and procedures deemed “worth the risk” 
when considering the likely outcome if 
the procedure is not performed. True 
accidents, such as a slip and fall of a 
patient, appropriately evaluated as low fall 
risk, sometimes happen. And eventually, 
the human body fails despite all efforts. The 
reality is that not all bad outcomes result 
from defects in care.
Despite these truths, thousands of 
healthcare leaders, clinicians and staff have 
worked tirelessly toward a goal of reducing 
harm. Many have set a goal of zero harm 
because “Zero is the only acceptable 
number in safety.”20 Avoidable suffering is 
the focus of healthcare organizations as 
they work toward this goal. Events of harm 
are outcomes that do result from defects 
in care. The healthcare industry has an 
obligation to protect patients from harm – 
to keep them safe while under our care. To 
be useful in measuring performance to this 
obligation, a patient safety measurement 
system must distinguish preventable harm 
from bad outcomes through a reliable, 
repeatable method.
The Safety Event Classification (SEC) 
system, shown in Figure 1, provides this 
method and is the foundation for a 
fundamental lagging measure of patient 
safety outcomes.
Most current event taxonomies are 
structured within categorical classification 
domains. Events are identified by event 
type, such as a wrong site procedure, fall 
with injury, or burn. In contrast, the SEC is 
an outcome-based classification system 
that takes event classification 3 steps 
further:
1.	
the event is assessed for defects in 
care, or deviations from generally 
accepted performance standards 
(GAPS);
2.	
a direct cause-and-effect relationship 
between deviations and the outcome is 
established, and
3.	
the safety event is classified according 
to level of patient harm resulting from 
the event.
The SEC follows an algorithm based on 
these three steps and is illustrated in 
Figure 2. This algorithm should be 
consistently applied when conducting 
safety event classification that leads 
to either determining that this is not a 
preventable safety event or that it is a safety 
event of one of three types – a near miss, a 
precursor event, or a serious safety event. 
These classifications are further explained in 
this narrative in the Assessing Outcome to 
the Patient section.
2
HPI Safety Event 
Classification (SEC®)

12
High Reliability Principles in 
Safety Event Classification
Notwithstanding all the details of the SEC® 
described elsewhere, the primary goal of 
any safety classification effort is to identify 
opportunities for improvement and assure 
that we have done all we can to best 
protect a patient from harm.
For almost two decades, healthcare 
organizations have focused on applying 
principles of high reliability in their work 
to achieve safe outcomes for patients, 
family, visitors, and the workforce in these 
organizations. The five principles described 
by Weick and Sutcliffe21 are all relevant to 
the process of safety event classification 
and ultimately the analysis of events to 
identify root causes so that corrective 
actions can be put in place.
In particular, the principle of a 
preoccupation with failure is important to 
consider in the SEC process, both when 
considering deviations from GAPS and the 
level of harm. 
The recognition that small, seemingly 
inconsequential errors are 
a symptom that something is wrong 
enables an organization to pay attention 
to deviations and what can be learned 
from them, irrespective of the outcome 
to the patient.
One challenge in any event review 
process is the realization that sometimes 
the safety event is caused by an action 
that is not taken rather than a wrong 
action; an error of omission not 
commission. Also, at times there can 
be a reluctance to identify a case as a 
preventable safety event because those 
reviewing the case do not want to make 
assumptions about the decisions made 
or actions that are taken as they put 
themselves in the shoes of the caregiver. 
During a review of an event, it can be 
difficult at times to recreate those 
“in-the-moment” decisions that are 
made to determine if they were 
correct or not correct. 
When faced with this situation it is 
recommended that an organization 
do the following:
1.	
Ask the question “Are we holding 
ourselves to the highest standard of 
care”? The difference here is that we 
are focusing on standards of reliability 
and safety, not legality.
2.	
Incorporate other principles of high 
reliability into the discussion as 
relevant, in particular a “sensitivity to 
operations” (paying attention to what’s 
happening on the front line) and a 
“reluctance to simplify interpretations” 
(encouraging diversity in perspectives 
to avoid quick decisions).
2
HPI Safety Event 
Classification (SEC®)
©2006 Healthcare Performance Improvement, LLC
Was there a deviation from generally 
accepted performance standards?
Did the deviation reach the patient?
Did the deviation cause moderate to severe 
harm or death?
SERIOUS SAFETY EVENT
PRECURSOR SAFETY EVENT
NEAR-MISS SAFETY EVENT
NOT A SAFETY EVENT
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
Figure 2
Safety Event Decision Algorithm

13
Before addressing the extent of harm that 
the patient experiences in an event, it is 
critical to confirm that in fact the event was 
avoidable or preventable. For this reason, 
the first two of the defining considerations 
of the SEC are 1) the presence of a deviation 
from generally accepted performance 
standards (GAPS) and 2) the extent to which 
the deviation caused, contributed to or 
otherwise worsened an already existing 
condition.
Types of deviations
There are two predominant types of human 
performance deviations: (1) human acts, 
hereafter called human errors, and (2) 
equipment, device, and technology failures, 
hereafter called equipment failures. In 
addition, although they are a relatively small 
contributor, there is the potential for natural 
disasters such as wildfires, hurricanes, 
pandemics to place extreme pressures on 
normal human performance.
Human errors are the most common 
deviations leading to safety events. Human 
errors fall into five categories in the HPI 
Taxonomy of Individual Failure Mechanisms 
(Appendix F-1):
•	
Competency of the individual
•	
Consciousness of the task at hand
•	
Communication of information
•	
Critical thinking in decision making
•	
Compliance with known procedures 
and standards of care.
A brief mention regarding equipment 
failures as deviations is appropriate at this 
time. At times, patient care equipment or 
other mechanical tools in the organization 
appear to be the proximate cause of an 
event. The consideration regarding whether 
these failures are entirely unpredictable and 
therefore not a preventable failure should 
take into consideration factors such as:
•	
Confirmation that there was no user 
error or technique failure
•	
Was the equipment created or 
manufactured in-house and not by 
professional engineers
•	
Was there an issue with preventive 
maintenance of the equipment?
•	
Did a failure occur at an earlier time 
and not get reported or addressed 
appropriately or in a timely manner?
•	
Would an equipment failure have been 
predictable if there was a sufficient 
"preoccupation with failure" culture?
While human errors are the most 
proximate, or immediate, causes of safety 
events, human performance, however, 
is heavily influenced by conditions in 
the organization’s systems. Failures in 
the system might actually be the more 
significant deviation or root cause that 
leads to a patient safety event. This topic 
is addressed in more detail in Appendix 
C (Frequently Asked Questions in Using 
Safety Event Classification).
Assessing for deviations
2
HPI Safety Event 
Classification (SEC®)

14
System weaknesses fall into five categories 
in the HPI Taxonomy of System Failure 
Mechanisms (Appendix F-2):
•	
Organizational Structure
•	
Organizational Culture
•	
Work processes
•	
Policies and protocol
•	
Environment and technology.
•	
Identifying Deviations.
A deviation from GAPS is defined as any 
time a difference is detected between 
expected and actual performance. This 
includes times that expected performance 
may not be industry best practice. 
Wherever a difference exists between 
expected and actual performance, a 
deviation from GAPS exists.
Identifying deviations
A deviation from GAPS is defined as any 
time a difference is detected between 
expected and actual performance. This 
includes times that expected performance 
may not be industry best practice. 
Wherever a difference exists between 
expected and actual performance, a 
deviation from GAPS exists.
There are two factors which should be 
considered when identifying deviations. 
First, organizational practice expectations 
(written or unwritten) do not always reflect 
national best practice performance 
standards in protecting patients from 
harm. When reflecting on whether 
performance standards have been met, 
consideration should include external as 
well as internal sources of information 
such as established policies, procedures, 
and protocols; nationally recognized 
best practices and standards of care; 
industry-imposed practice mandates and 
requirements; implied professional practice 
standards; and objective clinical review by 
other experts (e.g., peer review). And most 
importantly it is important to confirm that 
the organization met its obligation to best 
protect the patient from harm.
Second, is the fact that standards 
continue to rise over time as a result of 
process improvements, advancements in 
technology, and clinical breakthroughs. 
What is considered a “generally accepted 
performance standard” today may, in the 
future, be assessed as a deficiency in care.
Considering "known 
complications"
Clinical complications are a known risk of 
certain procedures, treatments, or tests. 
Yet the decision is made to continue with 
the procedure, treatment, or test because 
the potential benefit is thought to be worth 
the risk associated with the intervention. 
Known complications should be 
distinguished from safety events resulting 
from deviations from GAPS.
Distinguishing between known 
complications and safety events, however, 
can be challenging. In order to support 
this process HPI defined a Known 
Complications “Test” to help determine if 
an event is a known complication and, if so, 
whether providers did everything possible 
to prevent the negative outcome. The 
Known Complications Test consists of 4 
questions that should be applied when an 
organization is attempting
2
HPI Safety Event 
Classification (SEC®)

15
2
HPI Safety Event 
Classification (SEC®)
The known complication test
Figure 3
Known complication questions
Considerations
Was the procedure, treatment, or test 
appropriate or warranted for the patient 
based on nationally recognized standards 
of care?
Since the complication is a known 
risk, was it anticipated before the test, 
treatment or procedure and was the 
standard of care employed to mitigate 
that risk?
Was the complication identified in 
a timely manner?
Was the complication treated according 
to the standard of care?
	–
Was the planned test or procedural appropriate 
given the condition and urgency at the time?
	–
Were there tests, treatments or procedures 
available that had the potential to address the 
identified problem with less risk?
	–
Was this an appropriate time for the procedure 
to be performed, e.g. there were other medical 
instability factors to consider, was it critical to do 
the test or procedure at this time or could the 
patient have been stabilized first?
	–
With knowledge of the potential risks or 
complications, was sufficient effort made to avoid 
any anticipated problems?
	–
These efforts could include type of equipment 
used, expertise available to perform the 
procedure, test or treatment, preparation of a 
team to be aware of the risks and readiness to 
address them quickly
	–
What was the earliest possible time that the 
complication would have been expected to be 
identified, e.g. during the procedure or treatment 
itself or within a short period of time after the test 
treatment or procedure is completed?
	–
Was monitoring or observation in place long 
enough to detect the condition, and if so, was it 
recognized as early as possible?
	–
If despite all efforts to prevent the complication, 
and having recognized its presence as soon as 
possible, was the appropriate or most effective 
care provided to reverse the effects of the 
complication?
1
2
3
4
Table 1
Known complications test
When faced with the need to determine if there is 
a deviation from GAPS and therefore a preventable 
safety event in the case of a known or anticipated 
complication, the review team should consider 
four questions.
•	
Answering ‘Yes” to each question in the table 
suggests the outcome should be classified as 
a “known complication”, therefore essentially 
saying that there was no deviation from generally 
accepted performance standards and for which 
there was no organizational causation.
•	
Answering “No” to any of the questions suggests 
that there was a deviation from GAPS and the 
event is classified as a preventable safety event.
Identifying Deviations from GAPS
Deviations from generally accepted performance standards 
are determined by comparing actual performance to expected 
performance. Internal practice expectations do not always reflect 
industry practice expectations in protecting patients from harm. 
Consideration of performance expectations should include external 
as well as internal sources such as: Internal policies, procedures or 
protocols
•	
Nationally recognized best practices and standards of care
•	
Industry-imposed practice mandates and requirements
•	
Professional practice standards
•	
Objective review by other experts
•	
Organization's obligation to best protect the patient from 
harm
If any of the above are answered YES, proceed with safety events 
classification

16
2
HPI Safety Event 
Classification (SEC®)
Case Example: A patient had a procedure performed that involved a complex lysis of 
adhesions for small bowel obstruction. Forty-eight hours post-operative, the patient 
developed increasing abdominal pain and sepsis. A second operation showed a small 
perforation of the small bowel wall which was repaired successfully. In reviewing this case, 
the safety event classification team recognized that although a small bowel injury in such 
a procedure was not unusual, they wanted to confirm that this was a preventable safety 
event. They applied the Known Complication Test with the support of their Peer Review 
Committee
– If the answer to ALL four questions is YES: The event is considered a Known    	       	
   Complication and not a  Safety Event.
– If the answer to ANY question is NO: The event is a Safety Event.
Q1: Was the procedure, treatment, or test appropriate or warranted for the patient based 
on nationally recognized standards of care?
There was agreement that this patient’s condition required emergent surgery. While 
there was a history of other medical conditions, none were felt to be significant with this 
procedure. YES
Q2: Was the complication a known risk and were standard of care steps taken to mitigate 
it?
The surgeon performing the surgery was very experienced in this procedure and before 
they began the surgery, she informed the team that she needed to be able to concentrate 
carefully as this patient’s anatomy was potentially problematic to avoid lacerations or other 
complications. YES
Q3: Was the complication identified in a timely manner?
The patient’s symptoms of bowel pain, abdominal swelling and nausea began a couple 
hours after surgery. The surgeon when notified believed that these were normal post-
operative problems given the difficulties during the surgery and chose not to take the 
patient back to surgery until the symptoms worsened almost 48 hours later. NO
Q4: Was the complication treated according to standard of care and in a timely manner?
The patient returned to surgery where a small bowel laceration was identified. It was 
repaired successfully. YES
Figure 4
Example of the application of the HPI known complications test
Based on this assessment using the 
Known Complications Test, the safety 
event classification team determined 
that there was a deviation in GAPS 
and this was a Safety Event
To prevent inappropriately labeling true safety events 
as known complications, conservative assessment 
should be applied. As discussed later, the burden of 
proof should rest in demonstrating that the outcome 
was a known but also not preventable complication, 
rather than demonstrating that the outcome was just a 
known complication. The experience from the thousands 
of healthcare settings who have to date used the SEC 
process has shown that it isn’t always easy to accurately 
work through the Known Complications Test. 

Further guidance is provided in Appendix H (Implementing 
an On-Going Safety Event Classification Process), but 
the primary recommendation is to have a group of well-
respected medical and other clinical staff participate in 
the discussion and keep in mind the previously identified 
primary goal - to identify opportunities for improvement 
and  assure that we have done all we can to best protect
a patient from harm.

17
2
HPI Safety Event 
Classification (SEC®)
A direct, or a possible to likely cause-and-
effect relationship between the deviation 
and the outcome to the patient is the 
second consideration in the SEC. Did the 
deviation cause, contribute to, or in some 
way influence the resulting outcome to 
the patient?
While deviations from performance 
standards may coincide with a serious 
outcome, a direct cause and effect 
relationship between deviations and 
outcome may be difficult, and sometimes 
impossible, to determine. This may be 
the case when a patient is in critical 
condition or has other complications or 
co-morbidities (e.g., “the patient would 
have died anyway”). In such a case, the 
organization may be reluctant to declare 
a safety event or tend to downgrade the 
safety event classification.
Assessing for causation
The Ultimate Goal...
of safety event classification and subsequent 
cause analysis of the event is the identification and 
correction of root causes to prevent future events 
of harm. The organization can safeguard against 
safety event under-classification by considering 
its obligation to do everything possible to provide 
an uncompromised, safe experience. Did the 
organization best protect the patient from harm, 
regardless of the ability to definitively prove a direct 
cause-and-effect relationship.

18
2
HPI Safety Event 
Classification (SEC®)
During discussions within organizations as 
they wrestle with this challenge, it is often 
identified that if an unexpected patient 
outcome is to be identified as a preventable 
patient safety event, there needs to be 
proof. Addressing this topic of the burden 
of proof provides an insightful perspective 
when causation is questioned and requires 
shifting the assessment of an event from 
“prove to me that this is a safety event” to 
“prove to me that this is not a safety event”.
Figure 5 illustrates this different, and more 
helpful perspective on a burden of proof 
in any event discussion. This approach 
puts the emphasis on our duty to protect 
the patient from harm. The following 3 
questions can support this approach. They 
address the care that has been delivered 
to the patient from a reliability lens and 
encourage the identification of any 
opportunity for improvement that is 
not addressed: 




1.	
Were there conditions adverse 
to quality? 
2.	
Did we do everything possible to 
provide an uncompromised safe  
experience?
3.	
Would we have expected or wanted 
this level of care for ourselves or 
loved one?
The goal of event classification is to 
drive urgency of response and the initiation 
of the root cause analysis process. 
As described previously, sometimes events 
are not caused entirely or at all by direct 
human error. 
Organizational causation is often a factor 
and may not be immediately apparent. 
More evaluation, such as in medical staff 
or nursing peer review, or conducting 
a cause analysis may be necessary to 
determine whether the organization 
enabled the opportunity for a deviation 
from performance standards and therefore 
caused a preventable safety event. 
Organizations are wise to be aware that if 
there will be a delay in a final safety event 
classification, that strategies are in place to 
assure effective root cause analysis. 
This can include the collection and/or 
preservation of critical information 
(e.g., statements from involved individuals, 
physical evidence) and the initiation 
of an RCA, based on what is known 
to be adverse through the initial 
evaluation process.
Figure 5
Shifting the burden of 
proof in Safety Event 
Assessment
Prove that this IS NOT 
a safety event
Prove that this IS 
a safety event

19
2
HPI Safety Event 
Classification (SEC®)
Once a deviation from generally accepted 
performance standards (GAPS) is identified, 
and a causal connection is established, the 
third level of assessment is focused on the 
level of harm experienced by the patient 
and determination of the safety event 
classification. Figure 2 illustrating 
the algorithm for SEC is displayed again 
to the right.
•	
A Serious Safety Event (SSE) results 
in harm that ranges from moderate to 
severe patient harm or death.
•	
A Precursor Safety Event (PSE) results 
in minor harm, no detectable harm, or 
no harm.
•	
In a Near Miss Safety Event (NME), 
the initiating error is caught before 
it reaches the patient by either 
a detection barrier built into the 
process or, sometimes, by chance. The 
algorithm for determining safety event 
classification is shown in Figure 2.
Assessing Outcome to the Patient
©2006 Healthcare Performance Improvement, LLC
Was there a deviation from generally accepted 
performance standards?
Did the deviation reach the patient?
Did the deviation cause moderate to severe harm or 
death?
SERIOUS SAFETY EVENT
PRECURSOR SAFETY EVENT
NEAR-MISS SAFETY EVENT
NOT A SAFETY EVENT
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
Figure 4
Safety Event Decision Algorithm

20
2
HPI Safety Event 
Classification (SEC®)
The SEC Levels of Harm are outlined in 
Table 2 and detailed definitions and event 
examples of each SEC level of harm are 
provided in Appendix A. A harmonization 
of the SEC and the National Coordinating 
Council for Medication Error Reporting and 
Prevention (NCC MERP) Severity Index is 
found in Appendix B.
Note that the Severe, Moderate and 
Minor levels all have two designations – 
permanent or temporary. 
Some classification approaches 
differentiate levels of harm using the 
difference between these two designations, 
considering harm that is permanent to be 
of a higher severity irrespective of how 
significant the harm. The SEC levels of 
harm do not take this approach but use 
permanent and temporary as descriptors 
of harm rather than differentiators.
Table 2
SERIOUS SAFETY EVENT
HPI SEC
CODE
LEVEL OF HARM
PRECURSOR SAFETY EVENT (PSE)
SSE 1
Death
SSE 4
Severe temporary harm
SSE 5
Moderate temporary harm
PSE 1
Minor permanent harm
PSE 2
Minor temporary harm
PSE 3
No detectable harm
PSE 4
No harm
NME 1
Unplanned catch
NME 2
Last strong barrier catch
NME 3
Early barrier catch
SSE 2
Severe permanent harm
SSE 3
Moderate permanent harm
NEAR-MISS SAFETY EVENT (NME)

21
Serious Safety Event
Classification
Serious safety events range from death 
to severe and moderate temporary harm. 
The differentiation addresses unintended 
outcomes for the patient due to deviations 
in generally accepted performance standards 
that range from the need for a higher level 
of care, delays in discharge, readmissions, 
additional procedures, or lost function in 
activities of daily living up to death.
Precursor Safety Event 
Classification

Precursor safety events focus on minor 
harm or no harm. The term precursor 
is a deliberate one because regarding 
these events as potential “precursors” 
to more serious events reinforces that 
they are equally important to address and 
pay attention to. Recall the high reliability 
principle of a “preoccupation with failure”. 
There is a wide range of outcomes that 
are considered minor including the need 
for additional medication or short-term 
monitoring or simple procedures or 
diagnostic tests. 
In addition to an event that fortunately 
results in no harm to the patient, there 
is a level (PSE 3) in which the presence or 
absence of harm can’t be confirmed or 
determined for various reasons including 
the possibility that unintended outcomes 
happen long after the patient is being 
cared for or perhaps is lost to follow up 
for various reasons.
Erik Hollnagel in his book Safety-I and 
Safety-II22 identified these “lessor events” 
as fertile soil for organizational learning. 
His argument was that real learning comes 
from the repetition of corrections to earlier 
events. SSEs, by their nature are relatively 
rare, usually complex sequences of events 
that may never replicate themselves in the 
future. Whereas PSEs and near miss events 
are often instances of less-complex failure 
sequences that are likely to be repeated 
in the future before actually resulting in an 
outcome that energizes the organization 
to take action. Capturing, studying, and 
communicating these lessor events is 
at the essence of Safety-II.

Near Miss Safety Event 
Classification
Although Near Miss Safety Events are 
reported far less often, they are still 
valuable in the understanding of human 
error and the potential system issues that 
allow error to happen. The classification 
of Near Miss Safety Events is premised on 
the strength of the detection barrier that 
caught the error before it reached the 
patient. Increases in NME reporting are to 
be encouraged as they are an important 
sign of an improving culture of reliability, 
particularly reflected in this Preoccupation 
with Failure.
The most significant Near Miss Safety Event 
is the Unplanned Catch. The error passes 
through all detection barriers designed into 
the process (or there may be no detection 
barriers designed into the process at all), 
and it is caught by chance. For example, 
a patient recognizes that they are being 
given a medication they are unfamiliar with 
and they ask questions. There is much to 
be learned by collecting and analyzing this 
type of event in developing a strong high 
reliability operating system.
2
HPI Safety Event 
Classification (SEC®)

22
In a Last Strong Barrier Catch, the error 
passes undetected through nearly all 
defense-in-depth barriers designed into 
the process and is caught by a last strong 
barrier. As an example, consider an event 
sequence set in motion when a physician, 
acting quickly under time pressure to get 
to the operating room to begin a surgical 
case, writes an order for an unsafe dose of 
Heparin. This is the active, initiating error. 
The pharmacist who receives the order 
thinks the dose is high but does not seek 
clarification and fills the order. The order 
entry system, designed with system alerts, 
does not have an established alert for this 
abnormally high dose. The patient’s nurse, 
a new graduate with 3 months of 
experience, doesn’t recognize the dose 
as abnormally high. According to hospital 
policy, the nurse calls upon another 
nurse to verify this high-risk drug prior to 
administration. The high dose is recognized 
by a last strong detection barrier of the 
independent verification by the second 
nurse, and a call is placed to the ordering 
physician to correct the dose
The last strong detection barrier may reside 
early in related processes and not at the 
point of direct patient contact. Consider 
as an example the blood administration 
process which requires a type and- 
crossmatch of patient blood and blood 
product. Early in the process, a blood 
sample is drawn from the patient and a 
patient identification label is affixed to the 
sample. A break down in a two-person 
independent verification of the accuracy 
of specimen identification results in 
a switch of the labels of two patients 
requiring the type and cross-match 
process. Each label is affixed to the other 
patient’s blood sample. While the rest of 
the process is performed accurately – blood 
type is determined, the blood product is 
matched to the identified blood type, and 
patient identification to ensure that the 
identifiers on the blood product match 
those of the patient and on the patient 
armband – it was performed accurately on 
the wrong blood sample. In this case, the 
last opportunity to detect the mislabeled 
specimen occurs early in the process. The 
error travels throughout the rest of the 
flawlessly performed process unbeknownst 
to the care providers processing the 
specimen or administering the blood.
Now replay the Heparin example. The 
ordering physician writes an order for an 
inappropriately high dose of Heparin. Yet 
this time, the receiving pharmacist, who is 
concerned by the dose, calls the ordering 
physician to clarify the order. A correction 
is made, and the error does not reach the 
patient. This type of Near Miss Safety Event 
is classified as an Early Barrier Catch. While 
an error occurred, it is detected early within 
a well-functioning safety net of detection 
barriers. The Early Barrier Catch is the 
least significant of the Near Miss Safety 
Event categories.
2
HPI Safety Event 
Classification (SEC®)

23
2
HPI Safety Event 
Classification (SEC®)
Although the identification of a deviation 
from GAPS is usually easy to identify, given 
the complexities of patient situations, ever-
changing care methods, organizational 
systems and other factors, there are times 
that reaching consensus that a deviation 
exists may be difficult. As discussed 
previously, there may also be difficulty 
reaching consensus on whether that 
deviation caused the unintended outcome. 
Implementing an effective, collaborative 
team process in an organization is an 
important step in effective safety event 
classification. This topic will be addressed 
in more detail in Appendix H.
The experience of the thousands 
of organizations around the United States 
and elsewhere in the world who have 
implemented the SEC has helped to
 identify some common dilemmas in the 
process. In Appendix C are a list of FAQs 
regarding classification and 
recommended approaches. 
In addition to these specific questions, 
there are also broader topics that apply 
to many different types of safety events. 
These are discussed below.
Emotional Harm
While most of the harm examples in this 
document focus on physical injury or 
harm, there is no doubt that harm which 
is emotional, yet without immediate 
physical consequence, can be significant. 
Emotional harm is distinct from physical 
harm. It is harm experienced by a patient or 
family member which may erode trust and 
damage the patient-provider-healthcare 
system relationship. While this type of 
harm may be subjective in nature, it is 
characterized as unnecessary suffering that 
may not be physical. It is often based in a 
failure to demonstrate adequate respect for 
the patient or family member as a human 
being, sometimes negatively impacting the 
patient’s or family member’s dignity.
Unconscious Bias
At times during the SEC process, safety 
event classification teams find that there 
are different opinions not based on specific 
facts of the case, but other factors such 
as the person’s age (e.g. the patient was 
98 so she didn’t have much productive 
life left anyway) or the patient’s medical 
history (a patient with reports of chest pain 
isn’t triaged quickly in the ED because the 
nurse knew he came into the ED often with 
pain to get more narcotics). In addition, 
personal experiences with harm can affect 
one’s perspective on the level of harm. This 
problem is best thought of as bias – usually 
unconscious.
Unconscious biases are learned stereotypes 
that are automatic, unintentional, deeply 
ingrained, universal, and able to influence 
our behavior. Research has indicated that 
our brain makes up its mind up to ten 
seconds before we realize it. 
Additional Considerations in Safety 
Event Classification

24
There are a wide range of bias oriented 
situations that can affect not only how we 
provide care, but how we analyze events.
Press Ganey has addressed the larger 
subject of bias elsewhere, however, as it 
relates to this topic of SEC, the following 
may often be present during discussions 
about safety events:
1.	
Hindsight Bias – Take care as a safety 
event classification team to avoid the 
tendency to perceive events that have 
already occurred as having been more 
predictable than they actually were, 
particularly knowing retrospectively 
that the outcome was not a good one.
2.	
Confirmation Bias – It is easy to favor 
ideas that confirm our existing beliefs 
and what we think we know and not be 
able to see all sides of the situation
3.	
Attribution Bias – At times we can 
make judgments based only on the 
information we have available at hand 
that incorporates beliefs that include 
gender, race, education, disability and 
socioeconomic status.
Safety event classification teams avoid 
problems with biases that affect their 
consistency by encouraging the following: 
1.	
Recognize stereotypical thinking and 
replace biases and assumptions with 
facts
2.	
Seek to understand the perspective of 
the individual within a system that may 
be flawed
3.	
Explore a new perspective and increase 
opportunities for positive contact
Diagnostic Error
The topic of diagnostic error is both 
significant and large. Since the 
publication of the IOM report Improving 
Diagnosis in Healthcare, published in 
201523, there has been increasing attention 
on the contribution of this source of error 
in the occurrence of safety events. This 
report defined diagnostic error as “The 
failure to (a) establish an accurate and 
timely explanation of the patient’s health 
problem(s) or (b) communicate 
that explanation to the patient.” Data from 
HPI and the HPI Press Ganey PSO indicate 
that the safety event type of Delay in 
Diagnosis and Treatment is the greatest 
in number out of the total of 40 event 
types (Appendix D). 


In addition, further analysis of these 
events by HPI Press Ganey has shown 
that variations on the issue of diagnostic 
error are one of the major common cause 
analysis themes of these event types.
It is not the intent in this document to 
focus on the topic of diagnostic error in 
depth. However, it is an important source 
of error that should be considered during 
considerations of the SEC process, in 
particular when identifying a deviation 
in GAPS or when applying the Known 
Complications Test. In particular a common 
source of diagnostic error has been 
identified as cognitive bias. This can be 
defined as a predisposition to think in a 
certain way, perhaps using known patterns 
of thought or heuristics, that can at times 
lead to a failure in judgment when applied 
at the wrong time or incorrectly.
2
HPI Safety Event 
Classification (SEC®)

25
Safety event classification teams can 
incorporate key principles of diagnostic 
error in their SEC process by the following 
actions:
1.	
1) Educating the team (along with the 
rest of the organization) on the topic 
of diagnostic error. Excellent resources 
are available from the Society to 
Improve Diagnosis in Medicine.
2.	
2) Incorporate key principles of causes 
of diagnostic error in the SEC process 
when considering deviations in GAPS 
or causation of event questions. These 
can include issue of teamwork and 
communication, system support for 
effective decision making including 
electronic tools, etc.
3.	
3) Focus efforts to support more 
consistent and comprehensive 
reporting of safety events that 
could include causes related to 
diagnostic error.
2
HPI Safety Event 
Classification (SEC®)

26
3 
HPI Serious 
Safety Event 
Rate (SSER) 
Choosing a 
denominator

27
SSER for Acute Care Settings
Rolling 12-month rate of Serious Safety 
Events per 10,000 adjusted patient days
#SSE during past 12 months
#APD for past 12 months
SSER =
 x 10K
3
HPI Serious Safety Event 
Rate (SSER®)


In order to maintain a regular and quick 
sense of the impact of embracing and 
implementing a safety and high reliability 
management system, organizations must 
have the ability to clearly measure and 
display their progress toward Zero Harm. 
Therein lies the value of the Serious Safety 
Event Rate (SSER). The SEC serves as the 
foundation for the calculation of the SSER.
The SSER is a volume- adjusted measure 
of Serious Safety Events, those events 
occurring from a deviation from generally 
accepted performance standards that 
result in moderate to severe patient harm 
or death. The SSER is calculated monthly 
as the number of Serious Safety Events for 
the previous 12 months per 10,000 adjusted 
patient days (or other volume measure) for 
the same time period, as shown in Figure 6.
The volume adjustment is important as it 
helps to account for organizational size. 
Consider the following example: A system 
has two hospitals: a 300-bed facility that 
has had fifteen (15) events in a 12-month 
period and a 60-bed facility that had two 
(2) events in the same twelve-month period. 
The SSER’s for the two facilities are 2.6 
and 2.8, respectively, because they are 
adjusted for volume. 
Particularly within healthcare systems, 
the volume adjustment helps to create 
comparable SSER metrics for the various 
facilities.
Calculating the SSER as a 12-month rolling 
rate provides two benefits. First, as Serious 
Safety Events do not occur frequently, it 
presents a clearer picture of an event rate 
trend. Second, and most importantly, it 
rewards sustained improvement, rather 
than episodic improvement, in preventing 
Serious Safety Events. To achieve a “zero” 
SSER, the hospital must provide care that 
results in 12 consecutive Serious Safety 
Event-free months. The SSER can be used 
to determine baseline safety performance 
and to track effectiveness of efforts 
to improve reliability in patient safety 
performance.
SSER for Ambulatory Care Settings
Rolling 12-month rate of Serious Safety 
Events per 100,000 visits
#SSE during past 12 months
#visits for past 12 months
SSER =
 x 100K
Figure 6

28
3
HPI Serious Safety Event 
Rate (SSER®)
Choosing a denominator
The identification of the numerator (the 
number of SSEs) in the SSER is standard 
across all sites of care. The denominator 
however, while always a number 
representing care volume, needs to reflect 
the type of organization being represented 
and should be repeatable, reliable, and 
valid. In addition, it is important to know that 
the denominator is not risk-adjusted. An 
error or deviation from generally accepted 
performance standards that reaches the 
patient and has a negative effect is harm, 
regardless of comorbidities or severity of 
the patient condition. There is no risk-
adjusting for preventable harm.
For acute care facilities, the most 
commonly chosen denominator is adjusted 
or equivalent patient days. Adjusted 
Patient Days (APD) is a standardized 
metric developed by the American 
Hospital Association and is calculated by 
taking the weighted sum of “inpatient 
days” and “outpatient visits”. The weights 
are the proportion of revenue derived 
from inpatient and outpatient activities, 
respectively24. This number is generally 
a metric that is readily available from an 
organization’s finance department.
One issue that is important to consider is 
that the denominator should be inclusive 
of all the facilities that contribute data 
(events) to the numerator. For example: 
A hospital operates a surgical center and
two free- standing emergency care centers 
in addition to their inpatient services. If 
the numerator includes events from the 
hospital, surgery center, and two ECCs 
then the volume data in denominator 
must include all of those facilities as well.
While APDs may be an appropriate 
denominator for hospitals, there are other 
denominators that can be considered for 
alternative care settings. Table 3 illustrates 
these options. When the volume number is 
particularly high, e.g. in ambulatory settings, 
the SSER formula may be adjusted to “per 
100,000” encounters/visits rather than the 
10,000 used for inpatient settings.
Physician offices, ambulatory 
clinics or outpatient centers
Patient visits or encounters
Nursing Home Days
Resident Days
Patient visits or encounters
Specially calculated patient days 
(for Hospice settings)
Nursing homes and assisted 
living facilities
Home health & hospice care
Table 3
SITE OF CARE
VOLUME OPTIONS

29
3
HPI Serious Safety Event 
Rate (SSER®)
Due to variation in event detection and 
capture, HPI-Press Ganey does not 
recommend comparison of the actual 
SSER between organizations, even facilities 
within one organization. What is suggested, 
however, is that a comparison of the 
percent of SSER reduction following the 
stabilization of the safety and reliability 
culture interventions (i.e. establishing a 
baseline) is a valuable comparative metric 
within systems.
Organizations may identify other particular 
reasons to define a different denominator 
from those mentioned above. This decision 
should take into consideration a list of what 
distinguishes a great denominator, such 
as: being readily available, reproducible 
over time, meaningful to operations, 
and reflective of resource consumption 
(volume).
However, while the actual number might 
be slightly different from organization to 
organization, the important focus is not 
the actual number, but the display or 
“curve” of the rate line. The focus is the 
percent decrease in serious safety events, 
not the actual number.

Comprehensive capture 
of events
Consistent application 
of the HPI SEC criteria
Practices to support 
Safety Event 
Classification
HPI Safety Event 
Detection Assessment 
survey for hospitals
Application of SSER as 
a safety metric
4
Applying the 
HPI SEC® & SSER® 
Patient Safety 
Measurement 
System
30/42

31
4
Comprehensive capture 
of events
The SEC and SSER complement the 
tracking and reporting of Joint Commission-
defined Sentinel Events, NQF Serious 
Reportable Events, and other state-required 
or industry-imposed reportable events. 
They also serve to transcend variation in 
different event taxonomies that exist in 
healthcare today.
To enable a reliable safety measurement 
system that provides a valid measure of 
safety performance over time, two factors 
are important, 1) comprehensive capture of 
events and 2) consistent application of the 
SEC classification criteria.
Comprehensive Capture 
of Events
Full knowledge of safety events ultimately 
begins with a culture that encourages 
reporting adverse outcomes and sharing 
information about errors and mistakes that 
are made in providing care and service. 
While a reporting culture is not the focus 
of this paper, brief comment is offered on 
three factors that influence the health of 
a successful reporting culture.
First, leaders, staff, and medical staff 
members must know what events are 
expected to be reported. 
Most individuals report events that result in 
harm to the patient or have the significant 
potential to result in harm. Many staff have 
identified however that it is less clear, of the 
need to report events that did not result in 
harm or errors or mistakes that were caught 
before they reached the patient.
The second issue impacting reporting is the 
fear employees have about error reporting. 
When the organizational response to 
reporting is perceived as punitive to those 
involved in the event, rather than seeking to 
understand the process and system factors 
that influenced the individual’s decision, 
employees are less inclined to report an 
event. Medical staff may believe that it 
isn’t expected that they participate in the 
process of event reporting.
Finally, the reporting process must be 
as simple as possible. Everyone in the 
organization needs to perceive that the 
burden to report is worth the effort. 
Building and sustaining a healthy reporting 
culture is an ongoing process, yet it is 
important to recognize this as a factor 
that can influence the accuracy of SSER in 
reflecting the safety performance of the 
organization.
Comprehensive capture of safety events 
requires that the organization proactively 
seek possible events that might qualify as a 
safety event. Rather than waiting for events 
to be “pushed” for consideration, having a 
clearly defined “pull system” is important. 
While most healthcare organizations 
have adopted centralized reporting and 
data repository for error and events, 
some have multiple reporting processes 
and information systems particularly for 
different sites of care or different types 
of reporting (e.g. regulatory reporting 
vs. complaints vs. patient experience or 
emotional harm). Experience with event 
reporting systems in recent years has also 
shown that the easier it is for all staff (direct 
and indirect caregivers) and members of 
the medical staff to quickly and effectively 
report an event, the more likely that the 
collection of events will be 
as comprehensive as possible.

32
4
Consistent application of 
the HPI SEC criteria
There are multiple sources for the 
identification of events. The following 
can be considered as opportunities for 
the reporting and collection of events for 
assessment as Safety Events of any type:
•	
Events qualifying as Joint Commission-
defined sentinel events;
•	
State-reportable safety events and/or 
other regionally recognized reportable 
event;
•	
Clinical quality indicator incident and 
surveillance data including, but not 
limited to, nationally established NQF 
Serious Reportable Events and AHRQ 
Adult and Pediatric Patient Safety 
Indicator variances such as falls with 
injury, stage 3 and 4 pressure ulcers, 
restraint use with injury, hospital-
acquired infection, and resuscitation 
codes (See Appendix E HPI Taxonomy 
of Safety Events in Healthcare 
Harmonization);
•	
CMS defined Hospital Acquired 
Conditions
•	
Events reported through the medical 
and nursing peer review process;

•	
Global triggers or adverse drug events 
classified by NCC MERP criteria B 
through I
•	
Patient concerns or reports; and
•	
Claims and suits.
Consistent Application of HPI 
SEC Criteria
Several factors may contribute to variation 
in accuracy of event detection and thus 
lead to an SSER numerator that does not 
reflect the true number of Serious Safety 
Events in the organization. The first factor is 
deficiencies in event reporting, as discussed 
above under “Comprehensive Capture of 
Events.” Second, the organization may 
exclude, or omit, certain types of Serious 
Safety Events (e.g., hospital acquired 
infections, safety events classified as peer 
review cases) from the SSER calculation.
These may be deliberate exclusions, or 
the exclusions may not be recognized 
because these types of events have been 
normalized and not perceived as a Serious 
Safety Event. The third factor is inter-rater 
variation in classification of safety events 
with outcomes that fall at the border of 
moderate to minimal harm.

33
4
Practices to Support 
Safety Event Classification
Practices to Support Safety 
Event Classification: 
One of the more important strategies that 
organizations using the SEC process have 
identified is to implement a strong safety 
event review process. Appendix H illustrates 
further details for establishing this process.
ingrained, universal, and able to influence 
our behavior. Research has indicated that 
our brain makes up its mind up to ten 
seconds before we realize it. 
Key practices for this process include:
1.	
Identify a consistent group of people 
to serve as a “SEC Panel or Team” to 
provide expertise, consistency, and 
integrity in event classification. The 
group should be a mix of clinicians, 
non-clinicians, SEC methodology 
experts and leadership senior enough 
to gain organizational trust.
2.	
When deciding is difficult, use a 
consensus scale such as the example 
in Figure 7.
3.	
When classifying an event, always use 
the SEC algorithm and always ask ALL 
the questions: Was there a deviation? 
Did the deviation reach the patient? 
What was the level of harm?
4.	
Keep a record of challenging event 
classification cases and classification 
rationale. This record provides a 
useful reference when assessing 
similar future cases and enables the 
group to look at changes in their own 
perspectives in event classification. 
This becomes your organizational 
“case law” that can be referred to when 
ensuring organizational consistency in 
classification.


5.	
Charge one person with the 
responsibility for thinking/asking 
about precedent, i.e. how has the 
organization addressed a similar event 
in the past – your Case Law
6.	
What happens in the discussions, stays 
in the discussions. Ensure that the 
group speaks with one voice outside 
the meetings.
Accuracy to the SEC criteria is important, 
but consistency is king
A Consensus Scale
We MUST -- Technically/Clinically & Emotionally
We SHOULD -- Technically/Clinically & Emotionally
Good Decision -- Technically/Clinically 
Bo Strong Opinion -- Technically/Clinically - But I will support
Not Best -- Technically/Clinically & Emotionally
We SHOULD NOT -- Technically/Clinically & Emotionally
We CAN'T -- Technically/Clinically & Emotionally
+3
+2
+1
0
-1
-2
-3
We have consensus
No 
consensus
If any person rates themselves as a -2 0r -3 then there is not consensus. 
That person should provide an alternative to the group and then revote.

34
4
HPI Safety Event 
Detection Assessment 
Survey for Hospitals
HPI Safety Event Detection 
Assessment Survey for 
Hospitals© 
The stepwise approach for identifying 
possible safety events, accurately 
screening events to determine if they are 
Serious Safety Events and calculating the 
SSER has been described previously. HPI 
developed the Safety Event Detection 
Assessment Survey for Hospitals© 
to aid organizations in assessing the 
comprehensiveness of safety event 
detection capabilities and effectiveness 
of event classification processes.
Survey questions are designed to assess 
the health of the organization’s reporting 
culture, safety event reporting processes, 
structures for “casting a wide net” to 
ensure comprehensive identification of 
potential safety events, and methods of 
screening potential events to urgently 
determine classification as a safety event. 
Survey results assist the organization in 
identifying strengths and gaps in safety 
event detection and screening processes 
for actionable improvement that are 
informed from identified better practices. 
In addition, the Survey assesses the degree 
of transparency of lessons from the cause 
analysis of internal/external events to 
demonstrate the degree of reinforcement 
of a commitment to learning from errors, 
Results from the Survey administration can 
be compared to organizations with more 
SEC experience for benchmarking.
Application of SSER as 
a Safety Metric
Due to variation in event capture across 
organizations in the healthcare industry, 
HPI does not recommend comparing 
the actual, discrete SSER of one 
organization, and including internally 
across distinct facilities within a system, 
with the SSER of another organization 
for benchmark purposes. 
Input
Identify events from 
various sources such as:
SEC Process
Screen events based on
organization or individual
culpability and level of 
harm to the patient
Output
SEC classification 
& SSER
Serious sfety event
Figure 7
Peer review activities
CMS hospital acquired conditions
Claims management information
Others
Regulatory or state required reportin
Internal event reporting systems
Clinical quality reports
Medication error reporting
CMS HAC & HMI dataSpecific 
event triggers
Serious safety event detection & screening

35
4
Application of SSER as a 
safety metric
However, within systems where there 
is consistency in event classification 
processes, comparisons of the percent of 
SSER reduction following implementation 
of safety/reliability culture improvement 
efforts, is encouraged and may provide 
valuable learning insights.
Within and across organizations using 
the SEC and SSER, HPI sees and expects 
to continue to see a decrease in the 
variation of SEC application. This occurs as 
organizations strengthen event reporting, 
increase awareness of system contribution 
to safety events, and build consistency in 
the determination of event classification. 
Organizations have engaged in self-
assessing their safety event detection 
and screening capabilities, identifying 
best practices in these areas, and refining 
processes to reduce cross organization 
variability in event detection and screening. 
As hospitals work collaboratively to reduce 
event capture variation and improve 
inter-rater reliability of SEC, the SSER 
has the potential to become a very useful 
comparative indicator across organizations.

36
Sources
1 Institute of Medicine. Patient Safety: Achieving a New 
Standard for Care. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 
2003.
2 2016 National Healthcare Quality and Safety Report. AHRQ: 
https://www.ahrq.gov/research/findings/nhqrdr/nhqdr16/
index.html. Accessed 2 November 2017.
3 CMS Hospital Compare: https://www.medicare.gov/
hospitalcompare/search.html. Accessed 2 November 2017.
4 The Joint Commission is an independent, not-for-profit 
organization that accredits and certifies healthcare 
organizations and programs in the United States. The 
definition of a sentinel event is found on the Joint 
Commission website at www.jointcommission.org/
sentinelevents. Accessed 1 March 2009.
5 The National Quality Forum is a not-for profit public-
private partnership working to promote common healthcare 
measures.
6 The National Quality Forum, “Serious Reportable Events in 
Healthcare: A Consensus Report,” 2002. Available online at 
http://www.qualityforum.org/pdf/reports/sre.pdf. Accessed 1 
March 2009
7 The National Quality Forum, “The National Quality 
Forum Updates Endorsement of Serious Reportable 
Events in Healthcare,” Press Release, 16 October 2006. 
Available online at http://www.qualityforum.org/pdf/news/
prSeriousReportableEvents10-15-06.pdf. Accessed 1 March 
2009.
8 Chang, P. Schyve, R. Croteau, D. O’Leary, and J. Loeb, “The 
JCAHO Patient Safety Taxonomy: A Standardized Terminology 
and Classification Schema for Near Misses and Adverse 
Events,” International Journal for Quality in Health Care, 17 
April 2005, 17(2):95-105.
9 The World Health Organization, “The Conceptual 
Framework for the International Classification for Patient 
Safety,” January 2009. Available online at http://www.who.int/
patientsafety/taxonomy/en/. Accessed 1 March 2009.
10 Department of Health & Human Services, “Adverse Events 
in Hospitals: State Reporting Systems,” OIE -06-07-00471, 
December 2008. Available online at http://www.oig.hhs.gov/
oei/reports/oei-06-07-00471.pdf. Accessed on 1 March 2008.
11 Patient Safety Organization (PSO) is a designation 
established as part of the Patient Safety & Quality 
Improvement Act of 2005 for qualified organizations to 
collect, aggregate, and analyze information on medical errors 
reported by healthcare providers.
12 AHRQ Development of Common Formats. https://www.pso.
ahrq.gov/common/development. Accessed on 5 October 
2020.
13 The HPI SEC & SSER Patient Safety Measurement 
System for Healthcare (HPI 2009-100) ©2009 Healthcare 
Performance Improvement, LLC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
14 The HPI SEC & SSER Patient Safety Measurement System 
for Healthcare Rev 2 (HPI 2009-001) ©2009 Healthcare 
Performance Improvement, LLC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
15 Retirement of Select AHRQ Quality Indicators, v2019 
Software. May 23, 2019. https://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.
gov/News/Default.aspx. Accessed on 28 September 2020.
16 Common Formats for Event Reporting - Hospital Version 
2.0. https://www.psoppc.org/psoppc_web/publicpages/
commonFormatsHV2.0 Accessed on 28 September 2020.
17 The Joint Commission Sentinel Event Policy CAMH Update 
2, January 2016. www.jointcommission.org › camh_24_se_
all_currentpdf-1.pdf
18 CQMC Core Sets http://www.qualityforum.org/CQMC_
Core_Sets.aspx Accessed on 28 September, 2020
19 2014 Guide to State Adverse Event Reporting Systems from 
the National Academy for State Health Policy. https://www.
nashp.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/2014_Guide_to_
State_Adverse_Event_Reporting_Systems.pdf/ Accessed on 
28 September 2020.
20 Clapper, C, et al. (2019) Zero Harm: How to Achieve Patient 
and Workforce Safety in Healthcare. McGraw-Hill Education. 
p 2.
21 Weick, Karl E.; Sutcliffe, Kathleen M. (2007). Managing the 
Unexpected. Hoboken, NJ: Jossey-Bass.
22 Hollnagel, Erik. Safety-I and Safety-II: The Past and Future 
of Safety Management. CRC Press; 1st edition (May 8, 2014)
23 Balogh, E P et al. Improving Diagnosis in Healthcare. 
National Academy of Sciences. 2015. https://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/books/NBK338596/
24Lindrooth, R. et al. The Effect of Changes in Hospital 
Reimbursement on Nurse Staffing Decisions at Safety Net 
and Nonsafety Net Hospitals Health Serv Res. 2006 June; 41(3 
Pt 1): 701–720. doi: 10.1111/j.1475-6773.2006.00514.x.

WP-P0000
© Press Ganey, 2022. All rights reserved. 
pressganey.com

38
 
Appendix

39
APPENDIX A
The HPI safety event classification (SEC®) levels of harm
1  An invasive procedure is one where purposeful/deliberate access to the body is gained via an incision, percutaneous puncture, where instrumentation is used in addition to the puncture needle, or instrumentation via a natural orifice. 
Further details available at Sian Cousins, et al., “What is an invasive procedure? A definition to inform study design, evidence synthesis and research tracking,” British Medical Journal, 2019; 9(7): e028576. Published online 2019 Jul 30.
CODE
LEVEL 
OF 
HARM
DESCRIPTION
A deviation in Generally Accepted Performance 
Standards (GAPS) that causes, contributes to or 
worsens an already existing condition and results in:
EXAMPLES
To be used as illustrations only; Specific patient or resident situation may vary
Ambulatory care
Acute care
Post-acute care
SERIOUS SAFETY EVENT
SSE 1
Death
Death of the patient
• Delay of several months in communicating 
diagnostic tests that resulted in patient 
dying from unrecognized lung cancer
• Patient had symptoms of liver problems 
that weren't followed or addressed in timely 
manner over period of 18 months. Patient 
eventually expired of liver cancer.
• Delay in treating symptoms of sepsis 
resulting in patient death
• Patient complained of chest pain and 
shortness of breath after triage that showed 
worsening vital signs; went into cardiac 
arrest and not able to be resuscitated.
• Resident that was high risk to fall did not 
have prevention measures in place, fell, 
experienced subdural hematoma and died.
• A Home Care Hospice client expired without 
nursing support including necessary 
medications. The patient’s death was 
imminent, but there was a significant gap in 
comfort and standard hospice care resulting 
in an unattended death.
SSE 2
Severe 
Permanent 
Harm
Life-changing unintended outcomes or suffering. 
This can include events resulting in permanent loss of 
organ, limb, or vital physiologic or neurologic function. 
There is no expected change in the patient’s status 
or condition.
• Incorrect radiologic contrast dosing 
in outpatient CT resulted in need for 
permanent dialysis
• Tissue specimen from two patients mixed 
up resulted in a patient having a partial 
pancreatectomy and splenectomy that 
wasn’t needed.
• Wrong site procedure performed resulting in 
removal of healthy limb
• Missed diagnosis of stroke resulting in 
permanent impairment
• Compression wraps/stocking incorrectly 
applied to resident resulting in limb ischemia 
and partial amputation
• Venous irritant, administered to client on 
home care, undiluted by IV bolus through 
peripheral IV; extravasation resulted in loss of 
thumb & index finger
SSE 3
Moderate 
Permanent 
Harm
Unintended outcomes or suffering that are significant 
but not sufficiently severe to impact activities of daily 
living or business functioning. This can include events 
that result in permanent reduction in physiologic 
reserve, disfigurement, or impaired or aided sense or 
function. There is no expected change in the patient’s 
status or condition.
• During outpatient ENT procedure a paralytic 
was administered. Monitoring was ineffective 
with nerve damage and resultant facial 
paralysis.
• Incorrect radiology contrast dosing 
administered in outpatient CT resultingin 
reduced renal function
• Delay in treatment of limb ischemia post-
surgery requiring fasciotomy with disfiguring 
scars on leg
• Patient inappropriately discharged from 
ED and returned next day in worse shape 
needing additional surgery for colon 
resection.
• Preventive maintenance of ventilator in 
SNF not performed resulting in pulmonary 
function changes in patient not recognized
• Home Care Aide did not regularly adjust 
client’s head band resulting in pressure ulcer 
and permanent loss of hair on scalp
SSE 4
Severe 
Temporary 
Harm
Critical, potentially life-threatening unintended 
outcomes  or suffering. Response to this deviation 
can include: a prolonged transfer to a higher level 
of care/ monitoring; an additional major surgery, 
procedure or substantial treatment to resolve the 
condition; or an unnecessary significant treatment 
or procedure. The unintended outcomes last for a 
limited period of time with no permanent residual.
• Urinalysis from regular PCP visit showed 
abnormalities but no infection. Follow up not 
done though patient called describing being 
unwell. Patient admitted 2 days later with 
pyelonephritis and sepsis.
• Outpatient pharmacy incorrectly filled 
patient’s medication. After several days 
of wrong doses, he became dizzy, fell and 
fractured femur requiring surgery.
• Patient had unrecognized fluid overload 
progressing to pulmonary edema requiring 
resuscitation and transfer to the ICU
• Failure to diagnose respiratory insufficiency 
resulting in temporary intubation; earlier 
recognition would have avoided the 
intubation
• Patient in SNF had preventable fall with hip 
fracture that requires surgical repair and 
further rehabilitation
• Nursing Home resident with wound vac not 
correctly managed by nurse resulting in 
serious infection and requiring multiple other 
surgical procedures to address
SSE 5
Moderate 
Temporary 
Harm
Significant unintended outcomes or suffering. 
Response to the deviation can include: a higher level 
of care or more extensive monitoring; an additional 
invasive procedure1 or treatment to resolve the 
condition; delay in discharge or readmission; or the 
performance of an unnecessary invasive procedure. 
The unintended outcomes last for a limited period 
with no permanent residual.
• Patient complained of respiratory problems 
during Outpatient PT, wasn’t referred for 
assessment, and two days later transferred 
to ED for acute care
• Ordering and dispensing of incorrect infant 
formula in Pediatric Clinic led to admission 
for electrolyte imbalance
• Incorrect dose of dilaudid for pain resulting 
in over-sedation requiring transfer to ICU 
for short period of time after Narcan was 
ineffective in treating
• Failure to routinely assess IV site results in 
infection requiring extensive surgical incision 
and drainage
• Incorrect wound care technique at home 
care visit leads to infected wound requiring 
ED visit and IV antibiotics
• High risk patient in SNF fell and sustained 
hairline ankle fracture. Placed in splint for a 
week affecting mobility and ADLs

40
APPENDIX A
The HPI safety event classification (SEC®) levels of harm - continued
CODE
LEVEL 
OF 
HARM
DESCRIPTION
A deviation in Generally Accepted Performance 
Standards (GAPS) that causes, contributes to or 
worsens an already existing condition and results in:
EXAMPLES
To be used as illustrations only; Specific patient or resident situation may vary
Ambulatory care
Acute care
Post-acute care
PRECOURSOR SAFETY EVENT
PSE 1
Minor  
Permanent 
Harm
Unintended outcomes or suffering in which the 
response to the event requires little or no intervention. 
May also include performing an unnecessary minor 
procedure. There is no expected change in the 
patient’s status or condition.
• In outpatient surgery center, a knee 
procedure initiated then stopped on wrong 
side resulting in extra incision and small scar 
on knee.
• Excess outpatient radiation therapy received 
resulting in skin color change in non-critical 
cosmetic area.
• Inadequate protection of ulnar nerve 
during an operation resulting in permanent 
numbness of 4th and 5th fingers
• Rh-negative patient delivered without 
getting Rh immune-globulin shot as ordered. 
Future pregnancies will require higher 
monitoring and potential interventions.
• Lack of attention to skin care in a temporarily 
bedbound resident of assisted living center 
caused skin breakdown and scarring on hip
• Home Care client on oxygen experienced 
stage 2 pressure injury behind ear that 
eventually healed but left marks and 
tenderness
PSE 2
Minor 
Temporary 
Harm
Unintended outcomes or suffering in which the 
response to the event requires little or no intervention. 
May also include performing an unnecessary minor 
procedure. The unintended outcomes last for a 
limited period of time with no permanent residual.
• Results of breast biopsy specimen 
obtained in outpatient surgery center 
were inconclusive due to size of specimen 
resulting in need for additional ultrasound 
exams Physician in OB Clinic inserted an 
expired IUD requiring removal and reinsertion 
several months after procedure – much 
sooner than necessary.
• Retained sponge in vaginal cavity post 
C-Section found and removed during office 
exam; although no sign of infection MD 
orders prophylactic antibiotic
• Incorrect dose of dilaudid for pain resulting 
in over-sedation and Narcan resuscitation 
with quick resolution of symptoms
• Failure to assess IV site of patient on home 
care resulting in infection requiring oral 
antibiotics
• Incorrect transfer of nursing home resident 
to wheelchair resulting in laceration to toe 
managed with steri- strips and dressing.
PSE 3
No 
Detectable 
Harm
An event in which harm may exist, yet the ability to 
determineor confirm the existence or fact of harm 
is not possible. This can include events where the 
onset of harm may occur later in time but can’t be 
confirmed.
• Procedure performed in Outpatient Surgery 
Center with un-sterile instruments with no 
detectable post-procedure complications 
or infection.
• Pt came into PCP office with abdominal pain. 
Initial UA showed positive for pregnancy. 
After patient left, a second test done was 
negative. No information regarding effect on 
patient after informed as she switched PCPs.
• Inappropriate technique resulting in 
losing coronary artery stent into systemic 
circulation with no evidence of limb or organ 
ischemia
• After a difficult Delivery an infant’s Apgar 
was 4 and improved to 6 and then 9. Infant 
observed closely before discharge with no 
problems but there was some concern for 
possible difficulty in the future
• Home care client not contacted in timely 
concerning need for custom compression 
stockings leading to delay in physical therapy
• Single dose vial of lidocaine used with 
multiple patients - multiple times. Several 
dozen patients involved in event; some were 
not able to be contacted for follow-up.
PSE 4
No Harm
An event that results in no harm. There is sufficient 
information available to determine that no harm 
occurred.
• During a procedure in Urgent Care clinic, MD 
using cautery pin sparked a small fire but 
there was no burn on patient.
• HIM analyst for a large medical practice was 
conducting research project and noticed in a 
patient’s electronic record that a physician’s 
notes referred to a different patient’s 
name and lab results that didn’t match the 
patient’s diagnosis. She brought it to the 
physician’s attention who realized that he 
had inadvertently been charting in the wrong 
patient’s record and the lab results had been 
also mismatched. No harm occurred to 
either patient.
• Patient received blood transfusion intended 
for another patient, but both had the same 
blood type; no adverse reaction as a result
• Administration of an adult dose of vitamin K 
to full-term newborn infant with no effect on 
infant clinical status
• Significant delay in setting up homecare 
equipment affected timeliness of discharge 
to home
• Resident in Assisted Living Center eloped 
and was missing for 6 hours. Returned to 
facility with no observed adverse effects

41
APPENDIX A
The HPI safety event classification (SEC®) levels of harm - continued
CODE
LEVEL 
OF 
HARM
DESCRIPTION
A deviation in Generally Accepted Performance 
Standards (GAPS) that…
EXAMPLES
To be used as illustrations only; Specific patient or resident situation may vary
Ambulatory care
Acute care
Post-acute care
NEAR MISS EVENT
NME 1
Unplanned 
Barrier 
Catch
Passes through one or more error detection barriers 
but does not reach the patient because it is caught 
by chance. May also involve a barrier not designed or 
planned into the system.
• During night shift Security officer notices 
EVS worker starting to go into MRI suite with 
metal bucket and stops him.
• A clinic’s Medical Assistant went out to the 
waiting room to call for the next patient. 
She didn’t double check the patient’s ID but 
before care was provided the front desk 
clerk came to tell her another patient had 
come up to say that she thought the wrong 
patient had come up because he had told 
her his name as they chatted and it wasn’t 
the name the MA had called.
• Family member who reminds of a known 
medication allergy immediately before the 
medication is to be administered to the 
patient
• Environment Services Associate points out 
the need to perform a time out prior to a 
bedside procedure resulting in awareness 
that the procedure was about to be 
performed on the incorrect limb.
• Food Services associate notices pills in 
waste basket, thrown away by the patient, 
and alerts the resident’s nurse who ensures 
medication administration
• Home Care Nurse Aide was helping family 
prepare a client’s medications. One of the 
meds appeared to require 5 pills for each 
daily dose. She thought this was unusual 
although the pill bottle said to give 5 pills. 
She contacted the retail pharmacy who 
realized a serious error had been made.
NME 2
Last Strong 
Barrier 
Catch
Passes through all the possible early error detection 
barriers and is caught by a last strong error detection 
barrier designed in the system.
• EVS worker questions colleagues regarding 
new chemicals on her cart for cleaning. Still 
not comfortable she contacts her supervisor 
who says it’s OK to mix the chemicals. 
Still not comfortable she contacts the 
manufacturer who says that the chemicals 
should NOT be mixed
• Patient presented to Urgent Care Center 
with bleeding, nausea, and vomiting and 
ready to deliver a pre-term fetus. The 
resident was inexperienced and began 
to have difficulty. A nurse in the next care 
pod noticed the problem, stepped in and 
reminded the team of their TeamSTEPPS© 
actions. Everyone relaxed and prevented 
complications as they delivered the baby.
• Medication error that started with incorrect 
dose missed by MD and pharmacist but 
caught by nurse performing “5 Rights” prior 
to administration
• Wrong patient brought to the OR and 
identified during the team time out
• Nurse in SNF double checks on comatose 
patient’s record regarding latex allergy 
(which patient had) prior to catheter insertion 
even though son said that patient didn’t have 
the allergy
• LPN at Assisted Living Center helped new 
resident admitted from a nearby Rehab 
Center organize her self- medications. 
She thought the list was unusual as the 
patient had nothing ordered for her 
Diabetes. Though the orders had already 
been checked by the pharmacist and the 
admitting nurse, she pursued the problem 
and it was discovered that the patient was 
indeed missing an important medication.
NME 3
Early 
Barrier 
Catch
Is caught by an error detection barrier that occurs 
early in the process. This barrier is planned for or 
designed into the system’s defense in depth.
• Scheduling clerk uses phonetic and numeric 
clarification when registering a patient for 
colonoscopy and discovers that the wrong 
information had been sent from the PCP’s 
office
• Medical assistant who was last to leave Clinic 
noticed back door that was normally locked 
was unsecured and notified security officer 
who took action to fix door.
• Medication error identified when a 
contraindication alert fires in the medication 
electronic order entry system
• During bedside shift change report, care 
team identifies that multiple IV lines in a 
complex ICU patient are not labeled and 
makes the correction to minimize risk of 
confusion
• Equipment technician delivering oxygen 
equipment to client’s home and during 
standard checking process finds a heating 
unit behind her chair that could cause 
problem
• NA at a SNF started to leave resident’s 
room after putting him to bed. She noticed 
the STAR/Attention to Detail reminder and 
went back to make sure she had taken all 
necessary precautions to protect patient 
from a fall.

42
APPENDIX B
The HPI safety event classification (SEC®) levels of harm
Harmonization with NCC MERP severity index coding
1   NCC MERP Index for Categorizing Medication Errors © 2001. https://www.nccmerp.org/types-medication-errors. Accessed online 29 September, 2020.
2   NCC MERP Index for Categorizing Medication Errors Algorithm © 2001. https://www.nccmerp.org/types-medication-errors. Accessed online 29 September, 2020.
3  An invasive procedure is one where purposeful/deliberate access to the body is gained via an incision, percutaneous puncture, where instrumentation is used in addition to the puncture needle, or instrumentation via a natural orifice. 
Further details available at Sian Cousins, et al., “What is an invasive procedure? A definition to inform study design, evidence synthesis and research tracking,” British Medical Journal, 2019; 9(7): e028576 . Published online 2019 Jul 30.
HPI Safety Event Classification (SEC) Levels of Harm Harmonization with NCC MERP Severity Index Coding
CODE
LEVEL 
OF 
HARM
DESCRIPTION
A deviation in Generally Accepted Performance 
Standards (GAPS) that causes, contributes to or 
worsens an already existing condition and results in:
NCC MERP INDEX FOR CATEGORIZING MEDICATION ERRORS1,2
National Coordinating Council for Medication Error Reporting and Prevention
Code
Description
SERIOUS SAFETY EVENT
SSE 1
Death
Death of the patient
I
An error occurred that may have contributed to or resulted in the patient’s death
SSE 2
Severe 
Permanent 
Harm
Life-changing unintended outcomes or suffering. 
This can include events resulting in permanent loss of 
organ, limb, or vital physiologic or neurologic function. 
There is no expected change in the patient’s status 
or condition.
H
Also Consider 
SSE 4
An error occurred that required intervention necessary to sustain life
G
Also Consider 
PSE 1
An error occurred that may have contributed to or resulted in permanent patient harm
SSE 3
Moderate 
Permanent 
Harm
Unintended outcomes or suffering that are significant 
but not sufficiently severe to impact activities of daily 
living or business functioning. This can include events 
that result in permanent reduction in physiologic 
reserve, disfigurement, or impaired or aided sense or 
function. There is no expected change in the patient’s 
status or condition.
G
Also Consider 
PSE 1
An error occurred that may have contributed to or resulted in permanent patient harm
SSE 4
Severe 
Temporary 
Harm
Critical, potentially life-threatening unintended 
outcomes  or suffering. Response to this deviation 
can include: a prolonged transfer to a higher level 
of care/ monitoring; an additional major surgery, 
procedure or substantial treatment to resolve the 
condition; or an unnecessary significant treatment 
or procedure. The unintended outcomes last for a 
limited period of time with no permanent residual.
H
Also Consider 
SSE 5
An error occurred that required intervention necessary to sustain life
SSE 5
Moderate 
Temporary 
Harm
Significant unintended outcomes or suffering. 
Response to the deviation can include: a higher level 
of care or more extensive monitoring; an additional 
invasive procedure1 or treatment to resolve the 
condition; delay in discharge or readmission; or the 
performance of an unnecessary invasive procedure. 
The unintended outcomes last for a limited period 
with no permanent residual.
F
Also Consider 
SSE 4
An error occurred that may have contributed to or resulted in temporary harm to the patient 
and required initial or prolonged hospitalization

43
APPENDIX B
The HPI safety event classification (SEC®) levels of harm - continued
Harmonization with NCC MERP severity index coding
HPI Safety Event Classification (SEC) Levels of Harm Harmonization with NCC MERP Severity Index Coding
CODE
LEVEL 
OF 
HARM
DESCRIPTION
A deviation in Generally Accepted Performance 
Standards (GAPS) that causes, contributes to or 
worsens an already existing condition and results in:
NCC MERP INDEX FOR CATEGORIZING MEDICATION ERRORS
National Coordinating Council for Medication Error Reporting and Prevention1
Code
Description
PRECOURSOR SAFETY EVENT
PSE 1
Minor 
Permanent 
Harm
Unintended outcomes or suffering in which the 
response to the event requires little or no intervention. 
May also include performing an unnecessary minor 
procedure. There is no expected change in the 
patient’s status or condition.
G
Also Consider 
SSE 2
SSE 3
An error occurred that may have contributed to or resulted in permanent patient harm
PSE 2
Minor 
Temporary 
Harm
Unintended outcomes or suffering in which the 
response to the event requires little or no intervention. 
May also include performing an unnecessary minor 
procedure. The unintended outcomes last for a 
limited period of time with no permanent residual
E
Also Consider 
SSE 5
An error occurred that may have contributed to or resulted in temporary harm to the patient 
and required intervention
D
Also Consider 
PSE 3
An error occurred that reached the patient and required monitoring to confirm that it resulted 
in no harm to the patient and/or required intervention to preclude harm
PSE 3
No 
Detectable 
Harm
An event in which harm may exist, yet the ability to 
determine or confirm the existence or fact of harm 
is not possible. This can include events where the 
onset of harm may occur later in time but can’t be 
confirmed.
C
Also Consider 
PSE 2
An error occurred that reached the patient but did not cause patient harm
PSE 4
No Harm
An event that results in no harm. There is sufficient 
information available to determine that no harm 
occurred.
C
An error occurred that reached the patient but did not cause patient harm
NEAR MISS EVENT
NME 1
Unplanned 
Barrier 
Catch
A deviation in Generally Accepted Performance 
Standards (GAPS) that passes through one or more 
error detection barriers but does not reach the 
patient because it is caught by chance. May also 
involve a barrier not designed or planned into the 
system.
B
Also Consider 
NME 2
NME 3
An error occurred but the error did not reach the patient (an “error of omission” does reach the 
patient)
NME 2
Last 
Strong 
Barrier 
Catch
A deviation in Generally Accepted Performance 
Standards (GAPS) that passes through all the possible 
early error detection barriers and is caught by a last 
strong error detection barrier designed in the system.
B
Also Consider 
NME 1
NME 3
An error occurred but the error did not reach the patient (an “error of omission” does reach the 
patient)
NME 3
Early  
Barrier 
Catch
A deviation in Generally Accepted Performance 
Standards (GAPS) that Is caught by an error detection 
barrier that occurs early in the process. This barrier 
is planned for or designed into the system’s defense 
in depth.
B
Also Consider 
NME 1
NME 2
An error occurred but the error did not reach the patient (an “error of omission” does reach the 
patient)

44
APPENDIX C
Frequently asked questions in using safety event classification
The experience of thousands of health care settings in using SEC® has highlighted some of the challenges in applying criteria to make an accurate, but internally 
consistent classification decision. The issues described below are illustrative of common questions and are offered as guidance by experts in this process.
FAQ
CASE EXAMPLE
KEY CONSIDERATIONS  (✔)  & SEC® APPROACHES
KEY WORDS
1
What if an event occurs with 
significant harm to a patient, 
even up to death, but the 
“errors” on the part of the 
individuals occurred because of 
failings in the system of care? 
Can we say there was a deviation 
in GAPS and therefore it is a 
safety event?
Background: A patient was admitted to the hospital by a 
neurosurgeon for a procedure using equipment and methods very 
new to the surgical team. Major complications occurred during the 
procedure.
What Happened that shouldn’t have happened? The surgeon was 
very experienced in this procedure and with this equipment, but the 
surgical team was not. The hospital had been anxious to bring this 
physician on board to increase market share and didn’t take sufficient 
special action to prepare for this new surgery, assuming the surgical 
team would learn the new process.
Patient Outcome: There were several intraoperative complications 
which the team had difficulty dealing with. The patient was transferred 
to the ICU for two days rather than the expected surgical unit and was 
ultimately discharged home.
SEC Challenge: The real deviation wasn’t really related to the lack of 
preparation on the part of team when beginning a new procedure. Is 
that still considered a deviation from GAPS?
✔ While most safety events involve some element of human error, at times the 
deviation occurs because of problems within the organization or the system of care, 
including unclear procedures, lack of education, ineffective monitoring to assure 
individual accountability, or a culture enabling proceeding despite uncertainty.
✔ These situations meet the criteria for a “deviation in GAPS” even though it was not a 
specific individual(s) who experience the deviation.
✔ High Reliability Organizing principles such as a preoccupation with failure and a 
sensitivity to operations are important tools to prepare for and manage to safe 
outcomes. A recognition that small, insignificant situations can lead to bigger 
problems and that strong teamwork can overcome problems more quickly and 
effectively enables the ability to manage for reliability and safety. Ask the question 
“Are we holding ourselves to the highest standard of care?” The difference here is 
that we are focusing on standards of reliability and safety, not legality. Complexity 
is not an excuse for unsafe care. Tools such as a proactive risk analysis using FMEA 
or other similar tools prior to beginning new processes or programs reinforces the 
principle of a "preoccupation with failure'.
Recommended SEC Approach:
The team reached consensus that if the organization had prepared more effectively 
for the arrival of this physician with new procedures and equipment the complications 
would not have occurred or at least would have been less severe.
Recommended Classification: SSE 4
System Failures;
Preoccupation with Failure;
Sensitivity to Operations
2
How do we handle an event 
involving patient suicide when 
it’s difficult to be certain that it is 
a preventable safety event?
Background: A patient was admitted to the Emergency Department 
with suicidal ideation. The patient was admitted but the next day he 
chose to leave AMA.
What Happened that shouldn’t have happened? The behavioral 
health social work assessment was not completed prior to the patient 
being discharged.
Patient Outcome: Patient committed suicide two days after returning 
home
SEC Challenge: While the patient was classified as a suicide risk, 
his primary care physician, who had known him for several years, 
determined his risk was very low and the patient promised he would 
seek care the next day. Was there a clear causation?
✔ Causation is at times difficult to confirm. The question to ask is, “Did we do 
everything possible to provide an uncompromised, safe experience, regardless of the 
ability to definitively prove a direct cause-and-effect relationship?”
✔ Strategies that can assist the SEC decision process particularly in difficult psychiatric 
situations include a good Task Analysis to confirm deviations in GAPS, assuring 
that the standard of review isn’t just a legal one and considering the “do no harm” 
standard. In addition, consider the Burden of Proof mindset (above).
Recommended SEC Approach:
The team was concerned about looking at this event and building in hindsight bias 
(See Unconscious Bias in White Paper Narrative). They agreed there was a deviation 
involving the delay in the social work assessment. However, although his PCP was not 
experienced in behavioral health evaluation factors, the team decided that they were 
not able to establish a direct causation, although many lessons were learned from this 
event.
Recommended Classification: Not a Safety Event
Suicide;
Causation;
Hindsight Bias

45
APPENDIX C
Frequently asked questions in using safety event classification - continued
FAQ
CASE EXAMPLE
KEY CONSIDERATIONS  (✔)  & SEC® APPROACHES
KEY WORDS
3
Is it really a deviation from GAPS 
if we do a procedure without 
waiting for diagnostic tests that 
turn out to demonstrate that the 
procedure was unnecessary?
Background: A patient was admitted with chest pain and SOB. 
Diagnostic tests were ordered and performed, but results had not 
been received before the physician decided to insert a chest tube. A 
later review of the tests indicated that a chest tube was unnecessary.
What Happened that shouldn’t have happened? The ED physician 
didn’t wait for test results to confirm the necessity.
Patient Outcome: The patient experienced an unnecessary invasive 
procedure
SEC Challenge: Was there really a deviation in GAPS?
✔ The importance of clinical judgment at the time should not be underestimated. But 
when it’s difficult to determine if there is a deviation in GAPS, using the tool of Task 
Analysis can be effective.
Task Analysis is an effective tool in situations where the event is more about what 
action isn’t taken, or is not taken effectively, during key processes, rather than actual 
errors made. Task/process expectations are compared with what was done to 
identify the deviations.
Recommended SEC Approach:
The SEC team focused on three questions in a simple task analysis:
1  Did the physical assessment or other parameters justify intervention at the time (e.g., 
appeared life threatening)? No, the patient’s condition wasn’t life threatening.
2  Why did it make sense to the physician at that time to insert the chest tube? The ED 
physician was very busy with several other patients and decided in his judgement it 
wouldn’t hurt to go ahead and have this patient taken care of just in case.
3  What standards for chest tube insertion exist? Agreed that chest tube insertion 
protocols needed to be clearer.
Recommended Classification: SSE 5
Task Analysis;
Unnecessary Procedure;
Chest Tube
4
Sometimes there are safety 
events in which there clearly 
is a deviation in GAPS in which 
the outcome was a patient 
death. But what if the patient’s 
clinical condition was such that 
they were not expected to live? 
Should these events be counted 
as preventable patient deaths 
and therefore an SSE 1?
Example #1
Background: A patient receiving Hospice care expires without nursing 
support when it was known that death was imminent in the next 24 
hours
What Happened that shouldn’t have happened? The team identified 
a clear deviation from the hospice’s stated standard of care for a 
patient close to death.
SEC Challenge: Should this be considered an SSE 1 or some other 
level of harm since death was expected?
Example #2:
Background: A patient was terminally ill and in the ICU. Death was 
expected within the next couple of weeks.
What Happened that shouldn’t have happened? A patient received a 
morphine overdose due to a medication error.
Patient Outcome: The patient expired and his family was not able to 
be with him at the time the event occurred.
SEC Challenge: Would this be an SSE 1 since the patient’s death was 
expected?
✔ At times, a team reviewing an event has considered that the patient was terminally ill 
and death was expected. But in the case that that death has been hastened because 
of an error, most organizations reach the conclusion that the earlier death was 
unnecessary and therefore is a preventable safety event.
✔ It is recommended that outcomes such as these be considered a preventable patient 
death, i.e., an SSE 1, if the error or omission shortened the patient’s life by even one 
minute.
Recommended SEC Approach:
In Example #1, even though the patient’s death was imminent, there was a significant 
gap in comfort or other appropriate hospice care resulting in an unattended death, 
Including the possibility of not receiving necessary comfort medications.
In Example #2, aside from the death that occurred earlier and for a different reason 
than the patient’s health status there is also the significance of the emotional harm that 
the family experienced.
Recommended Classification: SSE 1 for both events
Terminally ill;
Expected death;
Hospice;
Emotional Harm

46
APPENDIX C
Frequently asked questions in using safety event classification - continued
FAQ
CASE EXAMPLE
KEY CONSIDERATIONS  (✔)  & SEC® APPROACHES
KEY WORDS
5
In our healthcare system we 
have been working for several 
years, in both our ambulatory 
and acute care sites, on reducing 
healthcare acquired infections.
We consider them “never 
events”, but sometimes we 
aren’t able to clearly identify a 
“deviation from GAPS” so do we 
still consider this a preventable 
safety event, sometimes an SSE?
Background: In an Outpatient Dialysis Center, a patient developed 
an infection in his central venous catheter. It wasn’t clear how this 
infection occurred.
What Happened that shouldn’t have happened? It was suspected 
that staff did not perform the Central Line Infection Prevention 
Protocol correctly, but no one was certain or could identify who did 
not.
Patient Outcome: The patient required only a course of oral 
antibiotics for two weeks,
SEC Challenge: Can the event be classified if the department can’t 
identify the specific deviation from GAPS? Also do we even have to 
classify this since it doesn't appear to have harm level of an SSE?
✔ It may not always be clear if there is a deviation in GAPS, what the specific deviation 
was or which caregiver experienced the deviation when there is an unintended 
outcome such as a Healthcare Acquired Infection or a Pressure Injury.
✔ At a minimum, consider if the organization did everything possible to protect the 
patient from harm regardless of the ability to definitively prove a direct cause-and-
effect relationship.
✔ Some organizations have decided that certain types of events are universally 
preventable, irrespective of whether the specific deviation from GAPS is able to be 
identified. This should be an organizational decision, but when making the decision 
there should be:
1  Clarity in how and when the decision is made that it is a safety event, e.g. if a HAI 
meets the NHSN criteria for this event, and
2  No event is automatically an SSE. The decision regarding level of harm is made 
separately
Recommended SEC Approach:
The Infection Prevention Specialist suspected that the staff weren’t consistent in the 
standard protocol of “scrub the hub” for 15 seconds even though most staff believed 
they were doing this correctly. He separately asked each nurse to demonstrate how 
they do the process. He didn’t tell them he was actually timing them and discovered the 
average time was actually 8 seconds not the required 15. The review team agreed there 
was a deviation in GAPS.
Recommended Classification: PSE 2
Universally Preventable 
Events;
Difficult to Identify 
Deviations;
Organizational Case Law;
Causation
6
How do we handle a safety event 
that involves a patient fall? We 
have a fall risk program that 
includes bed alarms, but these 
don’t often actually “prevent” 
a fall.
Background: A resident in a long-term care facility was identified as 
high risk to fall. A volunteer had returned the resident to bed after 
returning from a PCP visit outside the facility. She put the side rails up, 
the call bell in reach and left the room. A half hour later the patient 
got out of bed unassisted to go to the bathroom.
What Happened that shouldn’t have happened? The volunteer didn’t 
activate the bed alarm nor notify the nurse that the resident had 
returned.
Resident Outcome: The resident fell and fractured his arm. He was 
taken to the ED for evaluation. No surgery was needed but a cast was 
applied, and he stayed in the hospital overnight before returning to 
the facility.
SEC Challenge: Was this really a preventable event? Bed alarms don’t 
really stop the patient from falling. Some nursing homes don’t even 
use them any more thinking that they make things worse.
✔ Much has been written about the value of alarms in preventing falls. Other than 
“alarm fatigue” – present in most care settings, other factors have been identified 
in long term care facilities that support not using alarms, including that the alarms 
sometimes confuse the residents, they don’t like them turned on and staffing to 
respond to alarms is lower than acute care.
✔ Research on this subject is often anecdotal, but recent meta-analysis1 has identified 
that whatever fall prevention program is in place, that it should be a comprehensive 
well thought out strategy relevant to the particular care setting.
Recommended SEC Approach:
The review team identified that some LTC facilities in their area were not using alarms. 
However, it was also noted that irrespective of the presence of the alarm, notification 
that the resident was back in his room would have been an important action that was 
also missed. All agreed that a more deliberate and comprehensive research-based 
approach to fall prevention was necessary.
Recommended Classification: SSE 5
Fall Prevention; Bed alarms; 
long term care; alarm 
fatigue

47
APPENDIX C
Frequently asked questions in using safety event classification - continued
FAQ
CASE EXAMPLE
KEY CONSIDERATIONS  (✔)  & SEC® APPROACHES
KEY WORDS
7
What do we do when an event 
occurs and the SEC team has 
difficulty reaching a decision 
about SEC because there is a 
difference of opinion between 
members of the team and the 
input from a Medical Staff Peer 
Review Committee?
Background: A patient with a history of colon cancer arrived in the ED 
with a fever and a possible rectal abscess.
What Happened that shouldn’t have happened? The order for the CT 
scan did not include details of the patient's medical history and the CT 
was incorrectly interpreted as a mass and not an abscess.
Patient Outcome: The patient was discharged home but returned the 
next day in septic shock and was admitted to the ICU and discharged 
a week later.
SEC Challenge: There wasn't a clear consensus in the SEC team on 
the presence of a deviation. They asked the Medical Staff Peer Review 
Committee for input and they had other physicians review the CT 
scan. They were split on whether it was correctly read although most 
believed if the correct patient history were known, it was more clearly 
an abscess.
✔ Any professional peer review activity is a process that is designed to address 
individual performance issues. While related to SEC, it is nevertheless a separate 
activity that may be able to inform the SEC, but need not prescribe it.
✔ Waiting for a "decision" in a peer review committee may unnecessarily delay a 
decision by the SEC team and cause a delay in effective event analysis.
✔ Even if the SEC team determines that there was a preventable serious safety event, 
and subsequent in-depth analysis activities provide further information that changes 
understanding of the event, it can be re-classified.
✔ An effective SEC team has membership representing an interdisciplinary team 
including broad physician expertise and the ability to reference subject experts when 
necessary in a timely fashion. (See Appendix H -Implementing an On-Going Safety 
Event Classification Process)
✔ Organizations experienced in SEC have made improvements in their professional 
peer review process including:
•  Incorporating the Known Complication questions into the process.
•  Separating the presence of human or system error from decisions regarding 
performance management (see Just Culture).
•  A “Nationally Recognized Standard of Care” is intended to mean the “best” 
standard of care and does not necessarily come from a national body or directive. 
A best standard may be local.
Recommended SEC Approach:
The SEC team agreed that aside from the possibility of a "misread" of the CT Scan, 
there clearly was a deviation in communication involving several care team members, 
enabled in part by EHR system issues. The consensus was that they did not do their best 
to “protect the patient from harm”, enabling a series of individual and system errors. 
Any other performance culpability decisions rested with the peer review committee and 
other HR processes and was not a focus of SEC.
Recommended Classification: SSE 4
Medical Staff Peer Review;
National Standards of Care;
Medical Staff Just Culture;
Burden of Proof;
Best Practice
8
We had a potential safety event 
that involved clear deviations 
from GAPS with a resulting 
patient death. However, the 
autopsy report indicated 
a different and apparently 
unrelated cause of death. How 
do we address the issue of 
causation?
Background: A patient is in the hospital for care related to various 
medical and behavioral health issues. One evening the patient was 
found non-responsive and attempts to revive him were unsuccessful.
What Happened that shouldn’t have happened? All agreed that there 
was a delay in recognition of the patient’s deterioration and getting a 
Code Blue started.
Patient Outcome: An autopsy was performed and indicated cause of 
death as pneumonia, which was not part of his original diagnosis.
SEC Challenge: The SEC team was concerned about calling this a 
preventable safety event.
✔ Don't confuse autopsy results with the analysis of an unexpected death when 
deviations are clearly present that at least contribute to the death.
✔ Studies have shown that autopsy results can be inaccurate and/or incomplete in 
cases involving circulatory and respiratory disorders. 2,3
Recommended SEC Approach:
Even though the “cause of death” was reported as pneumonia, relying solely on the 
medical examiner’s report was unreliable as this organization doesn’t typically have the 
context of the circumstances surrounding the death and therefore the results can be 
inaccurate and/or incomplete. In addition, if the cause of death actually was pneumonia, 
then there was likely a missed diagnosis and treatment of the pneumonia.
✔ Recommended Classification: SSE 1
Autopsy results;
Pneumonia;
Delay in Diagnosis
1   CMileski, M et al. Alarming and/or Alerting Device Effectiveness in Reducing Falls in Long-Term Care (LTC) Facilities? A Systematic Review. Healthcare (Basel). 2019 Mar; 7(1): 51. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6473316/
2   Kircher T, Nelson J, & Burdo H. (1985). The Autopsy as a Measure of Accuracy of the Death Certificate. New England Journal of Medicine, 313:1263-1269. https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM198511143132005
3   Mieno, M. N., Tanaka, N., Arai, T., Kawahara, T., Kuchiba, A., Ishikawa, S., & Sawabe, M. (2016). Accuracy of Death Certificates and Assessment of Factors for Misclassification of Underlying Cause of Death. Journal of Epidemiology, 26(4), 
191–198. https://doi.org/10.2188/jea.JE20150010

48
APPENDIX D
PATIENT
PROTECTION
CARE
MANAGEMENT
PRODUCT OR DEVICE
CRIMINAL
PROCEDURAL
ENVIRONMENTAL
Wrong Body Part
Wrong Patient
Wrong Procedure
Other Procedural
Post Procedure Death
of a Healthy Patient
Unintended Retention
of a Foreign Object
Electric Shock
Burn / Smoke
Inhalation
Fall
Restraint / Bedrail
Event
Other Environmental
Gas Administration
Event
Patient
Elopement
Suicide or
Attempted Suicide
Inappropriate
Discharge
Medication Event
Blood Product
Administration Event
Maternal/Perinatal 
Death or Disability
Pressure Injury
Delay in Diagnosis
or Treatment
Healthcare Associated
Infection (HAI)
Other Care
Management
Contaminated Drugs,
Devices, or Biologics
Device Malfunction
Intravascular
Air Embolism
Abduction
Sexual Abuse
Assault
Physical Abuse
Assault

49
APPENDIX E
HPI Taxonomy of Safety Events in Healthcare©
Harmonization with other Nationally Recognized Safety Event Reporting Taxonomies and Related Indicator Sets
This document is offered as a tool to complement other nationally recognized safety event taxonomies or 
safety/quality indicator sets used in healthcare settings. It is not all-inclusive, but incorporates common 
structures in use at this time in healthcare. Its intent is to provide guidance in mapping data collected with 
the HPI safety data systems of SEC® and SSER®.
HPI Safety Event 
Category
National Quality Forum (NQF) 
Serious Reportable Events1 (SREs)
The Joint Commission Sentinel 
Events2
HEDIS® Clinical 
Measures3
AHRQ Quality Indicators4:
Patient Safety Indicators (PSI), Prevention Quality Indicators (PQI); Inpatient Quality Indicators 
(IQI) & Pediatric (PDI) Indicators
CMS Value-Based Purchasing 
Program5
PR1: Wrong Body Part
1A. Surgery or other invasive 
procedure performed on the 
wrong site
Surgery or other Invasive 
procedure performed at the 
wrong site, on the wrong 
patient, at the wrong site, or 
that is the wrong (unintended) 
procedure for a patient
PR2: Wrong Patient
1B. Surgery or other invasive 
procedure performed on the 
wrong patient
Surgery or other Invasive 
procedure performed at the 
wrong site, on the wrong patient, 
at the wrong site, or that is the 
wrong (unintended) procedure 
for a patient
PR3: Wrong Procedure
1C. Wrong surgical or other invasive 
procedure performed on a patient
Surgery or other Invasive 
procedure performed at the 
wrong site, on the wrong patient, 
at the wrong site, or that is the 
wrong (unintended) procedure 
for a patient
PSI 05: Retained Surgical Item or Unretrieved Device Fragment 
Count
PR4: Unintended 
Retention of a Foreign 
Object
1D. Unintended retention of a 
foreign object in a patient after 
surgery or other invasive procedure
Unintended retention of a 
foreign object in a patient after 
an invasive procedure, including 
surgery
PSI 02 Death Rate in Low Mortality DRGs; IQI 08 Esophageal 
Resection Mortality Rate; IQI 09 Pancreatic Resection Mortality 
Ratel;
IQI 19 Hip Fracture Mortality Rate
PR5: Post Procedure 
Death of l Healthy 
Patient
1E. Intraoperative or immediately 
postoperative/post procedure 
death in an ASA Class 1 patient
PSI 02 Death Rate in Low Mortality DRGs; IQI 08 Esophageal 
Resection Mortality Rate;
IQI 09 Pancreatic Resection Mortality Ratel;
IQI 19 Hip Fracture Mortality Rate
Clinical Care Domain:
Total Hip or Total Knee 
Arthroplasty Complication 
Rate (COMP-HIP-KNEE)
PR6: Other Procedural 
accidental puncture, 
laceration or other 
issues in technique
PR6.1 Puncture/
Laceration
PR6.2 Mislabeled/Lost 
Specimen
PSI 15: Abdominopelvic Accidental Puncture or Laceration & PDI 
1: Accidental Puncture or Laceration
PSI 06, & PDI 05: Iatrogenic pneumothorax rate
PSI 14: Postoperative wound dehiscence rate
PSI 09 & PDI 08: Perioperative hemorrhage or hematoma rate;
IQI 11 AAA Repair Mortality Rate, IQI 12 CABG Mortality Rate,
PDI 01 Accidental Puncture or Laceration Rate, Intervention Rate,
IQI 30 Percutaneous Coronary
IQI 31 Carotid Endarterectomy Mortality Rate
 PR6: Other Procedural
PROCEDURAL

50
APPENDIX E
HPI Taxonomy of Safety Events in Healthcare© - continued
HPI Safety Event 
Category
National Quality Forum (NQF) 
Serious Reportable Events1 (SREs)
The Joint Commission Sentinel 
Events2
HEDIS® Clinical 
Measures3
AHRQ Quality Indicators4:
Patient Safety Indicators (PSI), Prevention Quality Indicators (PQI); Inpatient Quality Indicators 
(IQI) & Pediatric (PDI) Indicators
CMS Value-Based Purchasing 
Program5
EE1: Electric Shock
5A. Patient or staff death or serious 
injury associated with an electric 
shock in the course of a patient 
care process in a healthcare setting
EE2: Burn/Smoke 
Inhalation
5C. Patient or staff death or serious 
injury associated with a burn 
incurred from any source in the 
course of a patient care process in 
a healthcare setting
Fire, flame, or unanticipated 
smoke, heat, or flashes 
occurring during direct patient 
care caused by equipment 
operated and used by the 
hospital
EE3: Fall
4E. Patient death or serious injury 
associated with a fall while being 
cared for in a healthcare setting
Effectiveness of Care: Fall Risk Management; 
Physical Activity in Older Adults
PSI 08 In Hospital Fall with Hip 
Fracture Rate
EE4: Restraints/
Bedrail Event
5D. Patient death or serious injury 
associated with the use of physical 
restraints or bedrails while being 
cared for in a healthcare setting
EE5: Gas 
Administration Event 
(no gas, wrong gas, 
contaminated gas)
5B. Any incident in which systems 
designated for oxygen or other 
gas to be delivered to a patient 
contains no gas, the wrong gas, 
or are contaminated by toxic 
substances
EE6: Other 
Environmental 
electrical power loss; 
fires; environment of 
care issues
6A. Death or serious injury of a 
patient or staff associated with the 
introduction of a metallic object 
into the MRI area
Fire, flame, or unanticipated 
smoke, heat, or flashes occurring 
during direct patient care caused 
by equipment operated and used 
by the hospital
 PR6: Other Procedural
accidental puncture, laceration or other issues in technique
ENVIRONMENTAL

51
APPENDIX E
HPI Taxonomy of Safety Events in Healthcare© - continued
HPI Safety Event 
Category
National Quality Forum (NQF) 
Serious Reportable Events1 (SREs)
The Joint Commission Sentinel 
Events2
HEDIS® Clinical Measures3
AHRQ Quality Indicators4:
Patient Safety Indicators (PSI), Prevention Quality Indicators (PQI); 
Inpatient Quality Indicators (IQI) & Pediatric (PDI) Indicators
CMS Value-Based Purchasing 
Program5
PP2: Patient Elopement
3B. Patient death or serious injury 
associated with patient elopement 
(disappearance)
Any elopement (that is, 
unauthorized departure) 
of a patient from a staffed 
around the-clock care setting 
(including the ED), leading to 
death, permanent harm, or 
severe temporary harm to the 
patient
PP3: Suicide or 
Attempted Suicide
3C. Patient suicide, attempted 
suicide, or self-harm that results in 
serious injury, while being cared for 
in a healthcare setting
Suicide of any patient receiving 
care, treatment, and services 
in a staffed around-the clock 
care setting or within 72 hours 
of discharge, including from 
the hospital’s emergency 
department (ED)
Effectiveness of Care: Behavioral 
Health – Antidepressant Medication 
Management; Follow-Up Care 
measures for hospitalization or ED 
Visit for Mental Illness, ED visit for 
ETOH and Other Drug Dependence; 
Adherence to Antipsychotic Meds 
for patients with Schizophrenia
PP4: Inappropriate 
Discharge
3A. Discharge or release of a 
patient/ resident of any age, who is 
unable to make decisions, to other 
than an authorized person
PP4.1: Infant 
Discharged to Wrong 
Person
3A. Discharge or release of a 
patient/resident of any age, who is 
unable to make decisions, to other 
than authorized person
Discharge of an infant to the 
wrong family
PATIENT PROTECTION

52
APPENDIX E
HPI Taxonomy of Safety Events in Healthcare© - continued
HPI Safety Event 
Category
National Quality Forum (NQF) 
Serious Reportable Events1 (SREs)
The Joint Commission Sentinel 
Events2
HEDIS® Clinical Measures3
AHRQ Quality Indicators4:
Patient Safety Indicators (PSI), Prevention 
Quality Indicators (PQI); Inpatient Quality 
Indicators (IQI) & Pediatric (PDI) Indicators
CMS Value-Based 
Purchasing 
Program5
CM1: Medication Error 
wrong drug, dose, 
patient, time, rate, 
preparation, or routek
4A. Patient death or serious 
injury associated with a 
medication error (e.g., errors 
involving the wrong drug, 
wrong dose, wrong patient, 
wrong time, wrong rate, wrong 
preparation, or wrong route of 
administration)
Prolonged fluoroscopy with 
cumulative dose >1,500 rads to 
a single field or any delivery of 
radiotherapy to the wrong body 
region or >25% above the planned 
radiotherapy dose
Effectiveness of Care:
Respiratory – Pharmacotherapy Management of COPD 
Exacerbation; Medication Management for People with Asthma 
Cardiac – Persistence of Beta Blocker Treatment after AMI; 
Statin Therapy for Patients with Cardiovascular and Diabetes
Musculoskeletal – Anti-Rheumatic Drug Therapy for 
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Behavioral Health – Antidepressant Medication Management; 
Metabolic Monitoring for Children on Antipsychotics
Medication Management – Medication Reconciliation Post 
Discharge; Transitions of Care; Follow-Up after ED Visit for 
patients with Multiple Chronic Conditions
Overuse/Appropriateness – Avoidance of Antibiotics with 
Acute Bronchitis; Medication Management in the Elderly; Use 
of Opioids
Utilization – Antibiotic Utilization
HCAHPS – 
Communication 
About Medicines
CM2: Blood Product 
Administration Event
4B. Patient death or serious 
injury associated with unsafe 
administration of blood 
products
Administration of blood products 
having unintended ABO and 
non-ABO (Rh, Duffy, Kell, Lewis, 
and other clinically important 
blood groups) incompatibilities, 
Hemolytic transfusion reactions 
or transfusions resulting in severe 
temporary harm, permanent harm, 
or death.
CM3: Maternal/
Perinatal Death or 
CM3.1: Maternal 
Death/ Serious Injury
4C. Maternal death or serious 
injury associated with labor or 
delivery in a low-risk pregnancy 
while being cared for in a 
healthcare setting
Any intrapartum (related to the 
birth process) maternal death. 
Severe maternal morbidity (not 
primarily related to the natural 
course of the patient’s illness 
or underlying condition) when 
it reaches a patient and results 
in permanent harm or severe 
temporary harm
PSI 18: Obstetric Trauma 
– Vaginal Delivery with 
Instrument
PSI 19: Obstetric Trauma 
– Vaginal Delivery Without 
Instrument
CARE MANAGEMENT

53
APPENDIX E
HPI Taxonomy of Safety Events in Healthcare© - continued
HPI Safety Event 
Category
National Quality Forum (NQF) 
Serious Reportable Events1 (SREs)
The Joint Commission Sentinel 
Events2
HEDIS® Clinical Measures3
AHRQ Quality Indicators4:
Patient Safety Indicators (PSI), Prevention Quality 
Indicators (PQI); Inpatient Quality Indicators (IQI) & 
Pediatric (PDI) Indicators
CMS Value-Based Purchasing 
Program5
CM3.2: Neonatal 
Death/ Serious Injury
4D. Death or serious injury of a 
neonate associated with labor or 
delivery in a low-risk pregnancy
Unanticipated death of a full-term 
infant
PSI 17: Birth Trauma – Injury to Neonate
CM7: Pressure Injury
4F. Any Stage 3, Stage 4, and 
unstageable pressure ulcers 
acquired after admission/
presentation to a healthcare 
setting
PSI 3: Pressure Ulcer rate
CM8: Delay in 
Diagnosis or Treatment
CM8.1 Wrong 
Diagnosis
CM8.2 Missed 
Diagnosis
CM8.3 Delayed 
Diagnosis
CM 8.4 Wrong 
Treatment
CM8.5 Missed 
Treatment
CM8.6 Delayed 
Treatment
4H. Patient death or serious 
injury resulting from the 
irretrievable loss of an 
irreplaceable biological 
specimen
4I. Patient death or serious injury 
resulting from failure to follow 
up or communicate laboratory, 
pathology, or radiology test 
results
Severe neonatal 
hyperbilirubinemia (bilirubin >30 
milligrams/deciliter)
•	
Effectiveness of Care:
All 10 Prevention and Screening 
Measures – Adult BMI, Nutrition 
Assessment, Immunization, 
Screening for Lead; Breast, Cervical 
and Colorectal Cancer; Chlamydia 
and Care for Older Adults
•	
Respiratory Conditions – Testing for 
Children with Pharyngitis; Spirometry 
Testing in Assessment & Diagnosis 
of COPD
•	
Cardiovascular – Controlling High 
Blood Pressure
•	
Musculoskeletal – Osteoporosis 
Testing
IQI 15 & IQI 32 Acute Myocardial 
Infarction Mortality Rate; IQI 16 Heart 
Failure Mortality Rate; IQI 17 Acute Stroke 
Mortality Rate; IQI 18 Gastrointestinal 
Hemorrhage Mortality Rate; IQI 20 
Pneumonia Mortality Rate; IQI 90 
Mortality for Selected Procedures; IQI 91 
Mortality for Selected Conditions; PSI 04 
Death Rate among Surgical Inpatients 
with Serious Treatable Complications; 
PSI 06 Iatrogenic Pneumothorax 
Rate; PSI 09 & PDI 08: Perioperative 
Hemorrhage or Hematoma Rate; PSI 11 & 
PDI 09: Postoperative Respiratory Failure 
Rate; PSI 12 Perioperative Pulmonary 
Embolism or Deep Vein Thrombosis Rate;
Clinical Care Domain:
30 Day Mortality Rate for AMI 
(MORT-30-AMI), Heart Failure 
(MORT-30-HF), Pneumonia 
(MORT-30-PN), Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, 
(MORT-30-COPD), Coronary 
Artery Bypass Graft (MORT-30-
CABG),
CM10: Other Care 
Management 
(coordination or 
continuity of care; 
other event incidental 
to general care)
4C. Maternal death or serious 
injury associated with labor or 
delivery in a low-risk pregnancy 
while being cared for in a 
healthcare setting
Effectiveness of Care:
Diabetes – Comprehensive Diabetes 
Care
Behavioral Health – Follow-Up 
Care for Children with ADHD 
meds; Diabetes and Cardiovascular 
Screening for patients with 
Schizophrenia or Bipolar
Risk Adjusted Utilization – All Cause 
Readmissions; Hospitalization for 
Potentially Preventable Conditions.
PSI 18: Obstetric Trauma – Vaginal 
Delivery with Instrument
PSI 19: Obstetric Trauma – Vaginal 
Delivery Without Instrument
HCAHPS – Care Transition
CARE MANAGEMENT

54
APPENDIX E
HPI Taxonomy of Safety Events in Healthcare© - continued
HPI Safety Event 
Category
National Quality Forum (NQF) 
Serious Reportable Events1 (SREs)
The Joint Commission Sentinel 
Events2
HEDIS® Clinical Measures3
AHRQ Quality Indicators4:
Patient Safety Indicators (PSI), Prevention Quality 
Indicators (PQI); Inpatient Quality Indicators (IQI) & 
Pediatric (PDI) Indicators
CMS Value-Based Purchasing 
Program5
CM11: Healthcare 
Associated Infection 
(HAI)
Utilization & Risk Adjusted Utilization:
•	
HAI Standard Infection Ratio
•	
 Antibiotic Utilization
NQI 03: Neonatal Blood Stream 
Infection Rate
PSI 13 & PDI 10: Postoperative 
Sepsis Rate
PSI 07, & PDI 12: Central venous 
catheter-related blood stream 
infection rate
Catheter-Associated Urinary Tract 
Infection (CAUTI);
Central Line-Associated Blood 
Stream Infection (CLABSI); 
Clostridium difficile Infection (CDI)
Methicillin-Resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus 
Bacteremia Infection (MRSA); 
Surgical Site Infection (SSI)
HPI Safety Event 
Category
National Quality Forum (NQF) 
Serious Reportable Events1 (SREs)
The Joint Commission Sentinel 
Events2
HEDIS® Clinical Measures3
AHRQ Quality Indicators4:
Patient Safety Indicators (PSI), Prevention Quality 
Indicators (PQI); Inpatient Quality Indicators (IQI) & 
Pediatric (PDI) Indicators
CMS Value-Based Purchasing 
Program5
PD1: Contaminated 
Drugs, Devices or 
Biologics
2A. Patient death or serious 
injury associated with use of 
contaminated drugs, devices, 
or biologics provided by the 
healthcare setting
PD2: Device 
Malfunction
2B. Patient death or serious 
injury associated with use or 
function of a device in patient 
care, in which the device is 
used or functions other than as 
intended
PD3: Intravascular Air 
Embolism
2C. Patient death or serious 
injury associated with 
intravascular air embolism that 
occurs while being cared for in a 
healthcare setting
CARE MANAGEMENT
PRODUCT OR DEVICE

55
APPENDIX E
HPI Taxonomy of Safety Events in Healthcare© - continued
HPI Safety Event 
Category
National Quality Forum (NQF) 
Serious Reportable Events1 (SREs)
The Joint Commission Sentinel 
Events2
HEDIS® Clinical Measures3
AHRQ Quality Indicators4:
Patient Safety Indicators (PSI), Prevention Quality 
Indicators (PQI); Inpatient Quality Indicators (IQI) & 
Pediatric (PDI) Indicators
CMS Value-Based Purchasing 
Program5
CE1: Abduction
7B. Abduction of a patient/
resident of any age
Abduction of any patient receiving 
care, treatment and services
CE2: Sexual Abuse/
Assault
7C. Sexual abuse/assault on 
a patient or staff member 
within or on the grounds of a 
healthcare setting
Rape, assault (leading to death, 
permanent harm, or severe 
temporary harm), or homicide 
of any patient receiving care, 
treatment, and services while on 
site at the healthcare setting
CE3: Physical Abuse/
Assault
7A. Any instance of care ordered 
by or provided by someone 
impersonating a physician, 
nurse, pharmacist, or other 
licensed healthcare provider
7D. Death or serious injury of a 
patient resulting from a physical 
assault (i.e., battery) that occurs 
within or on the grounds of a 
healthcare
Rape, assault (leading to death, 
permanent harm, or severe 
temporary harm), or homicide 
of any patient receiving care, 
treatment, and services while on 
site at the healthcare setting
CRIMINAL

56
Sources
1 National Quality Forum Endorsed Serious Reportable Events 
in Healthcare: www.qualityforum.org. Last Accessed 23 
September 2020
2 The Joint Commission Sentinel Event Policy and Procedures: 
https://www.jointcommission.org/resources/patient-
safety-topics/sentinel-event/sentinel-event-policy-and-
procedures/. Last accessed 24 September 2020
3 The Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information Set 
(HEDIS) used to measure performance in Managed Care 
settings. Used by to the National Committee for Quality 
Assurance (NCQA) to rate quality of health plans. Only those 
measures potentially related to safety events are included, 
however all HEDIS measures have value when combining with 
other safety measures of care. https://www.ncqa.org/hedis/
measures/. Last Accessed 29 September 2020
4 AHRQ Patient Safety and Quality Indicators Version 
2020: https://www.qualityindicators.ahrq.gov/Modules/
all_resources.aspx. Last Accessed 23 September 2020
5 Hospital Value Based Purchasing (HVBP) Program FY 2018 - 
2025 Measures. https://www.qualitynet.org/inpatient/hvbp/
measures#tab1. Last Accessed 29 September 2020

57
APPENDIX G
CASE # 1 - ACUTE
CASE # 2 - ACUTE
HPI Safety Event Classification® (SEC) Case Studies
These case studies are offered to provide examples in applying the Safety Event Classification process. Although cases are set in various sites of 
care, with some adaptation the principles behind the classification decisions are adaptable to most care situations. Many health care organizations 
have used these cases as an Interrater Reliability exercise with their safety event review team or others.
Acute care examples
A patient was admitted to the critical care unit with congestive heart failure and 
later has a new complaint of chest pain persisting over several hours. Tylenol is 
administered but does not decrease the patient’s pain scale rating. The Resident 
orders a laboratory work-up. An EKG shows that the patient is experiencing an 
acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction. The attending cardiologist is called, but 
does not respond to multiple pages. The nurse does not escalate the patient’s 
emergent condition to other physicians or the rapid response team. The patient 
continues to decompensate, codes and expires.
A patient presented to the Emergency Department complaining of chest pain 
and is admitted to rule out myocardial infarction (MI). A CT scan is performed with 
an incidental finding of a “questionable atrial thrombus”. The ED physician and 
admitting intern are notified. The ED physician includes this information in his 
dictated report, but the intern does not include this information in the H&P. The 
attending cardiologist misses this information. The patient is discharged after 
an acute MI is ruled out. No assessment of the atrial thrombus was done. Two 
weeks later, the patient presents to the ED complaining of right sided flank pain. 
A CT scan shows a renal thrombus causing a right kidney infarction rendering the 
kidney non-functional which is further confirmed by additional flow scans.
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. Although an adequate assessment indicating 
the patient’s need for immediate intervention for 
acute myocardial infarction was performed, there 
was a significant delay in initiating treatment.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 1: Death
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM8: Delay in Diagnosis or Treatment
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. The information needed to diagnose the 
patient was available at the time of the initial 
hospitalization, the condition was not adequately 
assessed or appropriately treated.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 2: Severe Permanent Harm (delay in treatment 
resulted in loss of function of one kidney)
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM8: Delay in Diagnosis or Treatment

58
APPENDIX G
CASE # 3 - ACUTE
CASE # 4 - ACUTE
Patient ‘A’ is admitted for treatment of pneumonia. Admitting orders for 
“Lorazepam 1mg PO three times daily” is intended for another patient ‘B’ but 
inadvertently entered on patient ‘A’s’ medical record. Patient A receives six doses 
of Lorazepam. He requires a Foley catheter and due to his confusion, pulls it out 
causing damage to his urethra. This required significant urological surgery to 
correct the urethral damage an extension of hospital stay.
A patient was admitted with congestive heart failure and received multiple 
medications including sedative agents. A fall risk assessment was done and 
the patient was identified as high risk to fall. The Fall Prevention interventions, 
including use of bed alarm and rounding procedures were completed consistently. 
However, family members who usually spent the whole day at the bedside weren’t 
educated about the importance of keeping the alarm on even if they were in the 
room. One day they were standing just outside the room talking with the patient’s 
physician when the patient got out of bed to go to the bathroom. The family had 
turned off the alarm because it kept going off and didn’t think to put it back on 
when they left the patient alone. The patient fell and complained of intense hip 
and leg pain. Evaluation determines that that patient had a hip fracture as a result 
of this fall, requiring surgical repair and rehabilitation therapy.
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. An order was written on the wrong patient. It 
wasn’t caught by the physician, the pharmacist or 
the nurses administering the drug
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 5: Severe Temporary Harm (serious medication 
event leading to situation requiring significant 
surgical intervention and extended hospitalization)
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM1: Medication Error
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. Although the protocol-defined interventions 
were usually carried out by staff per protocol, in 
this case other important prevention strategies 
such as assuring that family members were clearly 
educated on importance of prevention methods 
were not implemented, enabling a situation where 
the patient was able to get OOB unnoticed.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 4: Severe Temporary Harm (hip fracture 
requiring surgical repair and rehabilitation)
It is unknown at the time of discharge whether 
there would be permanent lifestyle changes so the 
harm was not determined to be an SSE2.
Taxonomy Event Type:
EE3: Fall

59
APPENDIX G
CASE # 5 - ACUTE
CASE # 6 - ACUTE
A healthy Gravida 2 Para1 40-week gestation mother presents in active labor 
requiring routine monitoring according to Labor & Delivery protocols. Labor 
progresses to delivery of a healthy 6-pound infant with Apgar scores of 10 and 10. 
Within 2 minutes post-delivery, the mother, who is still being monitored, begins 
to develop extreme respiratory distress and signs of disseminated intravascular 
clotting (DIC) syndrome. Despite all emergent efforts to reverse the situation, the 
mother succumbs to what is later diagnosed as an amniotic fluid embolism.
A patient was receiving treatment for rhabdomyosarcoma. The physician ordered 
methadone for the post-surgical pain control. The nurse administering the 
medication, double-checked the medication calculation with another RN but did 
not request verification of the medication infusion pump setting as per hospital 
policy. The patient subsequently receives a 10-fold dose. Shortly thereafter the 
patient experienced signs of respiratory compromise and the nurse realized the 
setting error and immediately stops the pump, contacted the physician, and 
closely monitored the patient. A reversal agent was administered and appeared 
successful. But the patient was moved to the ICU for 12 hours for further 
monitoring in case of further problems.
Deviation from GAPS
No. Medical Staff Peer Review committee used 
the Known Complication Questions. They focused 
discussion primarily on questions 2 – 4. The risk 
of an amniotic fluid embolism occurring was 
identified as an extremely rare and, in most cases, 
unpredictable. This patient in particular had no 
know risk factors. Once the complication began 
the team recognized the problem quickly and took 
action. Literature shows that there is a mortality 
rate of 80% or greater with this condition and the 
team and made all efforts to save the patient. They 
answered “Yes” to all the questions and it was 
determined not to be a safety event.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes, but the event was not preventable. Not 
Applicable
SEC Level of Harm
-
Taxonomy Event Type:
-
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. The medication infusion pump setting was 
not double-checked by another RN according to 
hospital policy.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 5: Moderate Temporary Harm (respiratory 
compromise required a reversal agent and more 
intense monitoring including a brief stay in a high 
level of care)
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM1: Medication Error

60
APPENDIX G
CASE # 7 - ACUTE
CASE # 8 - ACUTE
A patient was being treated in the Cardiac Progressive Care Unit and had a heparin 
lock in place. As part of the routine hep-lock care, the nurse administered what 
she thought was the usual hep-lock flush solution from an unlabeled syringe 
she previously placed at the bedside. However, the syringe actually contained 
Cardizem, which she administered to the patient. The patient experienced an 
immediate hypotensive reaction, which quickly resolved without further incident.
Patient #1, was admitted with severe anemia and required a blood transfusion. 
Another patient, #2 was admitted to the same hematology unit with severe 
anemia and also required a blood transfusion. Patient #1 had Type O blood; patient 
2 had Type A+ blood. Per protocol, two nurses did a double check when blood was 
administered to patient #1, but they didn’t realize that the blood was an incorrect 
type. Patient #1 received the wrong transfusion (patient #2’s transfusion) but 
fortunately suffered no immediate blood reaction. However, over the long term, 
this patient may have a suppressed reaction with another transfusion due to the 
presence of A antigens.
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. The nurse did not follow medication labeling 
requirements or medication verification procedures 
prior to medication administration.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
PSE 2: Minor Temporary Harm (no apparent harm 
beyond the initial hypotensive reaction)
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM1: Medication Error
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. All verifications prior to blood administration 
were either not performed or not performed 
effectively.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
PSE 3: No Detectable Harm (no apparent harm at 
the time, though patient may have a suppressed 
reaction with another transfusion)
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM1: Medication Error

61
APPENDIX G
CASE # 9 - ACUTE
CASE # 10 - ACUTE
A patient had a laparoscopic hysterectomy and was discharged post-operatively 
without complications. She had discharge instructions for a follow-up visit which 
was scheduled for several days after discharge. During an examination at this 
follow-up visit, the surgeon discovered and removed a surgical sponge which had 
been placed in the vaginal space as part of the procedure. There was no infection 
noted.
A Sterile Processing Technician was cleaning three flexible endoscopes when he 
was interrupted to do another task in the OR. He handed off the cleaning task to 
second technician. In the hand-off, Tech #1 tells Tech #2 that enzymatic flush “was 
yet to be done”, but Tech #2 hears this as the flush “had been done”. No repeat 
back is performed. Tech #2 noted that this step in the cleaning checklist had not 
been initialed by Tech #1, but does not ask clarifying questions. She completed 
the task but left the checklist to be completed by the other Tech later that day. 
All three endoscopes were returned to service and used that afternoon, having 
manual brush cleaning only. When presented with the checklist the next day, Tech 
#1 confirmed that he had not done the enzymatic cleaning. Patients and families 
notified, and all started on prophylactic antibiotics as a precaution. No signs of 
infection reported at time of contact.
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. The sponge count procedure was either not 
performed or not performed effectively and was not 
removed at the end of the procedure.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
PSE4: No Harm (sponge was removed during a 
routine examination with no additional required 
intervention)
Taxonomy Event Type:
PR4: Unintended Retention of a Foreign 
Object
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. An incomplete cleaning process for 
instruments occurred, cascading from a series of 
communication failures.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
PSE3: No Detectable Harm Individual patient harm 
and suffering: Each endoscopy patient, in this 
scenario, is considered an individual event.
It is possible that one or more of the patients 
were extremely distressed and may have suffered 
significant emotional harm and/or suffering 
that required additional treatment or support. 
The patient’s experience is their reality. In these 
situations where the patient has expressed 
psychological harm, SSE 5 (moderate temporary 
harm) is the appropriate classification).
Taxonomy Event Type:
PD1: Contaminated Drugs, Devices, or Biologics

62
APPENDIX G
CASE # 1 - POST–ACUTE
CASE # 2 - POST–ACUTE
Post-acute care examples
A client of a Home Care program who was recovering at home after a traumatic 
brain injury. She was getting home therapy and during an OT appointment, the 
therapist applied a wet heat pack for treatment. The pack was heated in the 
microwave and had a washcloth rolled around it. The therapist thought the 
temperature was fine but didn’t notice that the patient winced when it was applied 
to her wrist and hand. When she checked it about 15 minutes later, she discovered 
that the patient had experienced a second-degree burn - red area and small 
blister - to his hand and wrist. Ointment and a gauze bandage were applied and 
the patient had no further problem.
A client of a Home Care program was receiving care post hospitalization for a 
leg injury that involved a wound vac. During an early wound case session, a nurse 
packed the wound with a small amount of white foam covered by black foam 
because there wasn’t enough of the white foam. She didn’t document the details 
of this so subsequent wound care visits by a nurse and dressing changes by the 
patient didn’t focus on the white foam, just the black. It was during a procedure to 
remove the wound vac the remaining white foam was discovered. The wound was 
very infected and required hospitalization for a short time with IV antibiotics and 
several procedures to address and resolve the problem.
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. The therapist should have confirmed that 
the pack wasn’t too hot and checked the patient 
sooner to confirm all was well.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
PSE 2 Minor Temporary Harm (The effect on the 
patient involved only minor treatment to heal the 
burn. No scarring as a result)
Taxonomy Event Type:
EE2: Burn/Smoke Inhalation
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. Nurse#1 didn’t handoff effectively in writing 
and subsequent caregivers didn’t probe wound 
carefully because they knew patient was doing the 
dressing changes and assumed it was OK.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 2 Severe Temporary Harm (While the 
hospitalization and IV antibiotics alone might have 
ended up as an SSE 5, the addition of several 
procedures to fix the problem elevated the harm 
to severe)
Taxonomy Event Type:
PR4: Unintended Retention of Foreign Object

63
APPENDIX G
CASE # 3 - POST–ACUTE
CASE # 4 - POST–ACUTE
A resident of a SNF had recently been admitted from an acute care hospital. The 
resident had been taking coumadin in the hospital, but the medication wasn’t 
included in the order list. It was included in the discharge summary problem list 
and medications, but the admitting physician didn’t order this medication. The 
pharmacist at the SNF did a medication reconciliation but despite mentions of 
the med in the discharge summary (which was not electronic) and recommended 
blood work related to the mediation didn’t pick up on the discrepancy to discover 
the error. The resident missed the medication for 5 days when the error was 
discovered. The resident didn’t appear to experience any harm but there was 
concern for problems later in their care.
A resident in a long-term care facility with left sided weakness from a previous 
stroke was identified as high risk to fall because of the weakness. A volunteer had 
returned the resident to bed after returning from a PCP visit outside the facility. 
She put the side rails up, the call bell in reach and left the room. A half hour later 
the patient got out of bed unassisted to go to the bathroom, injuring his right 
wrist requiring a splint to be placed for two weeks for stabilization while the injury 
healed.
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. Both the physician and the pharmacist missed 
opportunities to identify the need for the med 
(albeit not clearly available in past documentation).
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
PSE 3 No Apparent Harm (although patient seemed 
OK and current bloodwork was WNL, there was 
concern that problems may occur in the future and 
the patient should be monitored closely)
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM1: Medication Event
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. The deviation in this case was that the 
volunteer didn’t notify the nursing staff that the 
resident had returned so that they could make sure 
he was in a safe situation and possibly bring him out 
to join other residents in the day room. This nursing 
center does not use bed alarms as it was shown to 
further confuse the residents.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 5 Moderate Temporary Harm (While the 
treatment for this resident wasn’t significant in 
itself, it hampered his ability to perform ADLs 
without a level of assistance that wasn’t needed 
previously.
Taxonomy Event Type:
EE3: Fall

64
APPENDIX G
CASE # 5 - POST–ACUTE
CASE # 6 - POST–ACUTE
A nurse in a health care systems’ float pool is assigned to work at the 
organization’s Assisted Living Facility for several days. He begins passing out 
medications to the residents and some of them aren’t in their room but in the 
facility’s Day Room. Most of the resident’s don’t wear arm bands but have pictures 
inside their rooms for identification. The nurse depended on patient’s self-
identifying when passing meds in the Day Room. He had been introduced to the 
patients earlier that day and thinking he knew the patients, did the identification 
with saying the patient’s name as it seemed quicker and he was behind in 
this task. When the patient agreed, he gave the pill packet to them. Another 
resident hearing what transpired walked up to tell the nurse that this patient was 
responding to the wrong name. The nurse took the medications back and began 
to perform the identification process correctly by asking the patient to state name 
and DOB.
A patient was discharged to home with trach and PEG tube. Home Care services 
were ordered prior to discharge but the orders for the home care equipment 
were written by the physician overseeing the Home Care Division. These orders 
did not include details related to the respiratory needs including a nebulizer and 
trach care kit. The nurse coordinator for the Home Care service assumed that 
the previous DME company the patient had used would take care of this so didn’t 
take any action. That evening, the patient had respiratory problems that required 
readmission back to the hospital for 2 days.
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. The nurse
Deviation reached the 
patient?
No
SEC Level of Harm
NME 3 Unplanned Barrier Catch (It was fortunate 
that another resident overheard the error and 
stopped things before it was too late. Good 
medication practices, adapted for the setting 
shouldn’t require that another person stops the 
nurse from an error.
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM1: Medication Event
Deviation from GAPS
Yes (While there were errors on the part of the 
hospital staff by not arranging for home DME, both 
the physician and the nurse from the Home Care 
Division involved in this event contributed to this 
event, with an error in order writing (physician) and 
a failure to validate and verify (nurse).
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 5 Moderate Temporary Harm (The patient 
required a return to a higher level of care)
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM10: Other Care Management

65
APPENDIX G
CASE # 7 - POST–ACUTE
A patient was admitted to a SNF after a long hospitalization for several medical 
issues. The patient had a special catheter/IV in his hand that required that no 
labs be drawn from that side. Because the dressing had been changed by the 
County’s ambulance staff during transport, the warning not to draw blood from 
that side which was present in the hospital was missing. Information about this 
was mentioned once in the patient record but not highlighted as an important care 
notification. The nurse caring for the patient wanted to get the blood tests done 
before she left for the day. Because the patient had a cast on his other arm, she 
obtained the blood using this IV site and the pt ended up with a large hematoma 
requiring readmission to the hospital overnight to manage.
Deviation from GAPS
No. The initial error was on the part of staff not 
part of the facility or the organization. And while it 
would have been possible to eventually find the one 
mention of not using this IV to get blood, there was 
no significant reason at that time for the nurse to 
go looking for this information.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes. Although this was not a preventable event 
from the perspective of the SNF, they did however 
learn from the experience and instituted some new 
practices to avoid this problem in the future.
SEC Level of Harm
-
Taxonomy Event Type:
-

66
APPENDIX G
CASE # 8 - POST–ACUTE
A patient (#1) of a Rehabilitation Center had been admitted after acute care 
for a head injury. As part of the initial assessment he was identified as a low risk 
for elopement. Several weeks after admission however, his mental cognition 
began to change a bit. Some staff caring for him for the past two days noticed 
the difference and began to talk about it. Also, another patient (#2) had told a 
therapist that he (#1) had been talking about wanting to “get out”.

Because he (#1) was within days of discharge, she assumed that what he meant 
about “getting out”. The therapist intended to discuss this at the team meeting 
that day but it was canceled and she forgot. The next morning, he went outside 
the facility but no one stopped him to check as he seemed to be OK. They realized 
two hours later he had eloped. He was found about 6 hours after leaving and 
seemed to have no apparent physical injury but was found comatose later that 
evening. After admission to the hospital they discovered that he was experiences 
some cranial rebleeding. If it had been discovered and addressed sooner, it was 
likely they would have been able to prevent the more severe physical limitations 
that resulted.
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. While it was not unusual for some patients 
to ambulate outside the front entrance, the 
expectation was that the security staff should keep 
an eye on them and ask questions of clinical staff to 
confirm it was OK.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
PSE 4 No Harm (for the elopement it seemed at the 
time the resident was OK with no physical injuries)
Taxonomy Event Type:
PP2 Patient Elopement
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. There were signs that several team members 
had noticed that indicated the patient’s clinical 
status was changing but they weren’t followed 
up for various reasons. While the symptoms were 
subtle, the team in reviewing the case using the 
Known Complication Questions concluded that 
could have identified the problem sooner but better 
team communication.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 2 Severe Permanent Harm (Although there 
wasn’t 100% certainty that they could have 
prevented the resident’s resulting left sided 
paralysis, it was agreed that they didn’t do 
everything possible to reduce or eliminate this 
outcome)
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM8 Delay in Diagnosis or Treatment - CM8.3 
Delayed Diagnosis
This is an example of two events occurring with one patient:
1
2

67
APPENDIX G
CASE # 9 - POST–ACUTE
CASE # 10 - POST–ACUTE
A patient was admitted from the hospital to a Rehabilitation facility with a history 
of a stroke and an AMI. A month after admission she was SOB but this was 
attributed to seasonal allergies. It was also noted that she'd had 12 lb. weight gain 
but most though it was because of her decreased activity. Clinical staff didn't put 
together the weight gain and her respiratory issues and this was more difficult 
to assess because the facility was not on the same EHR as the hospital so they 
weren’t able to confirm details of her past medical history. Several days later she 
continued to have issues and was more SOB and wheezing but she told the NP it 
was something she ate so the NP didn't do anything further. That night when she 
began getting more SOB, the nurse contacted the MD who ordered a nebulizer 
treatment. That seemed to help but the next morning she was more hypoxic with a 
PO2 of 87%. She arrested shortly thereafter. The Code Blue was unsuccessful and 
she expired.
A patient was in the end stages of her illness from lung cancer and was receiving 
Hospice care. The nurse caring for the patient recognized that the patient was 
likely to expire within the next 24 hours. The program’s care standards were that 
patients without family or others who could stay with them at this stage (such as 
this patient) should be provided in person care and support. The nurse contacted 
the agency office because he was leaving for a trip that evening. Because it was a 
major holiday the next day, they were unable to find any staff willing to care for this 
patient. The patient expired the next day alone and likely in some pain.
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. There were multiple opportunities for various 
members of the clinical care team to pursue 
other options for this patient’s symptoms. System 
problems with the electronic record made this 
more difficult, but not impossible.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 1 Death (It’s possible that this patient may 
have expired anyway as she had a history of AMI, 
but recognition of the possibility of other medical 
problems was delayed too long to assure greater 
chance of avoiding the unfortunate outcome)
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM8 Delay in Diagnosis or Treatment - CM8.2 
Missed Diagnosis
Deviation from GAPS
YES. The Hospice staff did not follow their stated 
policy not to allow a patient to die alone and in pain, 
although it would have been difficult to do because 
of the holiday situation.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 1 (Although death was the expected 
outcome, it was agreed that the team did not do 
everything that they could to assure the death 
was not unattended and that the patient was not 
uncomfortable or in pain.
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM10: Other Care Management

68
APPENDIX G
CASE # 1 - AMBULATORY
CASE # 2 - AMBULATORY
Ambulatory care examples
A physician was providing care via the TeleHealth service for a Primary Care 
Clinic. A patient with a history of atrial fibrillation needed a new prescription for 
coumadin. Blood work had been obtained and after talking with the patient, 
the physician ordered the new prescription dose electronically. However, he 
inadvertently ordered a much higher does than intended. It wasn’t high enough 
for the EHR alert to fire. The Pharmacy Tech prepared the medication for the 
patient to pick up. When the pharmacist in the clinic reviewed the work the Tech 
had done, he thought the dose seemed much higher than the patient (who he 
was familiar with) had originally taken and checked the lab results. Realizing the 
possibility of an error he contacted the physician who was able to correct the 
error before the medication was dispensed.
A patient presents for a surgical revision of a vascular shunt at an Ambulatory 
Surgery Center. The patient had a documented history of MRSA. This 
organization’s practice was to use Vancomycin for SSI prophylaxis particularly 
in procedures such as these. The information concerning the MRSA was not 
available to the surgical team preoperatively due to an unrecognized error in the 
coding of a new electronic health record. The patient did not receive the correct 
preoperative antibiotic and as a result developed a surgical site infection requiring 
several returns to the OR for debridement/washout and prolonged intravenous 
treatment with Vancomycin.
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. The physician didn’t realize he’d ordered a dose 
of medication that was not what he intended.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
NME 2 Last Strong Barrier Catch (If the pharmacist 
hadn’t paid attention and used his questioning 
attitude to validate and verify the incorrect 
medication would have been provided to the 
patient and he would have taken it.
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM1 Medication Event
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. Although the correct SSI prophylaxis was not 
used, this was due less to a human error, but to a 
system problem in the coding of information about 
some elements of past medical history that didn’t 
always flow effectively to outpatient settings.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SE4: Severe Temporary Harm (multiple returns to 
the OR and prolonged antibiotic therapy)
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM11 Healthcare Associated Infection (HAI)

69
APPENDIX G
CASE # 3 - AMBULATORY
CASE # 4 - AMBULATORY
An OB patient was receiving Rhogam shots during her pregnancy. She was given 
the 50 mcg dose instead of a 300 mcg dose. This was discovered the next day. In 
total, three patients received the wrong dose and they all had to come back to the 
clinic to receive the correct dose. The problem occurred because the pharmacy 
tech inadvertently ordered wrong dose vials of drug and the CMA and LPN who 
administered the doses didn’t double check that they had the wrong amount 
because the vials looked the same and this was the amount they always gave.
A patient came to an Urgent Care Clinic with an ankle injury. The treatment for 
the injury included a special “boot” for stabilization of the joint. Over next couple 
of weeks the patient came back to the clinic 3 more times complaining of pain 
and swelling around her ankle. Xray’s taken didn’t indicate and further ankle injury 
and the caregivers (different each time) just determined the patient was using her 
foot too much and not elevating as instructed. A day after her last visit she came 
to the ED with complaints of chest pain and it was determined she had blood clots 
in her lung that had originated from the ankle injury. The patient was hospitalized 
for 3 days.
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. Errors included inadvertent ordering error and 
not following medication administration policy.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes – Actually 3 different patients (therefore three 
different events)
SEC Level of Harm
PSE 2 Minor Temporary Harm (Patients had to come 
back for another visit and get extra injections.
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM1 Medication Event
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. Staff may not have considered the need for 
prophylactic anticoagulants, but primary error was 
not assessing the situation further when there was 
indications that something was wrong.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 4 Moderate Temporary Harm (Patient was 
admitted for 3 days – a higher level of care.
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM8 Delay in Diagnosis or Treatment - CM8.2 
Missed Diagnosis

70
APPENDIX G
CASE # 5 - AMBULATORY
CASE # 6 - AMBULATORY
While receiving care in an Outpatient Dialysis Center for approximately two weeks 
a patient developed an infection in his central venous catheter. It wasn’t clear how 
this infection occurred. It was suspected that staff did not perform the central line 
infection prevention protocol correctly or perhaps performed the correct actions 
inconsistently. No one was certain or could identify where the error occurred. The 
patient required IV antibiotics and was admitted to the hospital for several days.
A patient was receiving care in an OB Clinic. This patient had a history of insulin 
dependent gestational diabetes. Although the clinic did instruct the patient in how 
to care for the problem, she was known to have some behavioral health and social 
issues and was inconsistent in self-care and didn’t always keep her visits. They 
discussed options to more safely care for this patient but hadn’t implemented a 
plan of care. Ultimately the patient delivered the infant via c section, but there was 
unfortunately a fetal demise.
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. Most organizations see infections such as 
these as able to be prevented absent any specific 
reason why this was not possible. In particular 
when it is known that adherence to protocols is 
inconsistent.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes – Actually 3 different patients (therefore three 
different events)
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 5 Moderate Temporary Harm (patient required 
hospitalization for the infection)
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM11 Healthcare Associated Infection (HAI)
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. The Known Complication Questions are useful 
in this case. Question 2 – knowing there was a risk 
of a complication and taking steps to mitigate the 
risk was the one in which the answer would be 
No. Although the care team did consider how to 
more effectively care for this patient with difficult 
circumstances who also had the possibility of 
behavioral health problems, they never actually 
took the necessary steps.
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 1 Death
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM3.2: Neonatal death/serious injury

71
APPENDIX G
CASE # 7 - AMBULATORY
CASE # 8 - AMBULATORY
A patient came to an Urgent Care Clinic after slamming a hammer on his finger at 
a construction site. During the procedure to treat the serious injury, the MD made 
an incision to drain hematoma using cautery pin. She had a dry gauze in her other 
hand and it inadvertently came in contact with the cautery. This sparked a fire and 
the patient received a second degree burn to his hand. They decided to admit the 
patient overnight for IV antibiotics as an extra precaution.
A Scheduling Clerk in a large Ambulatory Care Practice was scheduling an Xray 
procedure for a patient. While doing this she inadvertently chose the wrong 
patient’s name in the list on the computer. It turned out that the two patients in 
the list were actually a father and a son. They had the same name (except for a Jr 
and a Sr) and the same month and year as a birthday. She chose the son’s name 
instead of the father. The error was discovered when the father showed up for the 
procedure and the Radiology Tech realized there was a problem because the birth 
year was 2005 and this patient clearly wasn’t 15 years old! The error was corrected 
in the computer and the patient received the correct procedure.
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. There wasn’t enough care taken in avoiding 
sparking a fire with the instruments and materials 
used in the procedure
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 5 Moderate Temporary Harm Although it’s 
possible to determine that an overnight stay wasn’t 
critically necessary, given the circumstances, it was 
the appropriate level of care.)
Taxonomy Event Type:
EE2 Burn
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. The clerk inadvertently chose the wrong name 
to register a patient for a procedure. The fact that 
most of the pertinent details were the same for 
both contributed to the error. (This is a true story!)
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
PSE 4 No Harm (Although there wasn’t a danger 
that the wrong patient would have gotten 
a procedure it was possible that the wrong 
information/test results might have gone into the 
wrong record.
Taxonomy Event Type:
CM10 Other Care Management

72
APPENDIX G
CASE # 9 - AMBULATORY
CASE # 10 - AMBULATORY
A patient had a procedure for a breast biopsy in an Outpatient Women’s Center. 
The information concerning the side intended for the procedure was unclear but 
the patient said she believed it was going to be on the left side. The technician 
prepared the patient for this side and the physician arrived and did the procedure. 
When the physician got the results several days later, he realized that the incorrect 
side had been done. Because of the concern for possible cancer diagnosis, the 
patient had to return for another procedure the next day.
A patient was at an ambulatory radiology department at a rural health clinic. In 
order to have the procedure done, the patient needed to get up on the table. 
While he was doing this he cut his leg on the edge of the table. This required 
several stiches to repair the laceration. The problem was that the extension for 
the table wasn't pulled out all the way because it was old and had some rust on 
it. The table had to be replaced, but the Clinic hadn’t yet done that despite some 
complaints from the staff.
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. Both the caregivers involved (individually and 
collectively did not take all necessary steps to 
assure a procedure was done on the correct side)
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 5 Moderate Temporary Harm. (The patient 
required a second biopsy procedure)
Taxonomy Event Type:
PR1 Wrong Body Part
Deviation from GAPS
Yes. This error was on the part of the clinic 
administration in not repairing or replacing the Xray 
table before a patient was harmed
Deviation reached the 
patient?
Yes
SEC Level of Harm
SSE 5 Moderate Temporary Harm (Laceration 
severe enough to require several stitches.
Taxonomy Event Type:
PD2 Device Malfunction

73
APPENDIX H
Implementing an On-Going Safety Event Classification Process
In order to maintain regular and consistent safety event review using the SEC® process, healthcare organizations need to create a structure and 
standard approach. The purpose of establishing a standard process is to ensure the appropriate response to events (more serious events warrant a 
higher level of response) and to support the calculation of the organization’s serious safety event rate (SSER®) and other safety metrics.
Key steps in establishing an effective SEC process
1.
Cast a Wide Net to 
Identify Safety Events 
Data about safety events can be 
found from a variety of sources. 
When setting up event review 
structures and processes be sure to 
consider all of the relevant sources 
of data for your organization.
Event reporting system
General safety event data,  Near misses
Patient Relations
Non-service-related patient complaints 
(delays in treatment, med errors, etc.)
Pharmacy
Medication errors,  Adverse drug 
reaction, Drug utilization reviews
Case Management
Returns to surgery
Unplanned readmissions
Unplanned extended LOS
Peer Review (MD and Nursing)
Mortality and morbidity reviews
Department specific indicators
Lab
Transfusion errors/ Blood Use Review
Mislabeled specimens
Legal
Claims/lawsuits
Infection Control
HAI’s
PI Teams
Events/issues that led to process teams
Other
AHRQ PSI Indicators, CMS HAC’s
 IHI Trigger tool

74
APPENDIX H
2.
Establish an Event 
Classification Team 
For consistent classification, it 
is best to charter a small group 
of knowledgeable and objective 
individuals to determine the final 
classification of safety events.
Example of a Safety Event 
Classification Team Membership
	–
Approximate an interdisciplinary clinical team 
for broad input
	–
Assure different medical/ clinical perspectives 
and invite others as needed
	–
In addition to standing members of the team, 
invite leaders of departments where events 
being discussed occurred.
Membership of a Safety Event Classification Team:
•	
Size and structure vary based on organization size and the types of care sites
•	
Team led by classification subject expert, e.g. Risk, Quality or Safety leader
•	
Incorporate owners of various data types, e.g. medications, HAIs, peer review etc.
•	
Assure representative senior leadership
•	
Include one or two non-clinical members that can ask the “dumb questions” that 
ultimately focus the team’s effort
•	
At System level, consider chartering an oversight team (with the chairpersons of 
each facility event review team and others as members) to ensure classification 
consistency across business units.

75
APPENDIX H
3.
Create a Charter for the 
team’s functioning 
Meeting Frequency
•	
Start at least weekly
•	
Focus efforts primarily on potential serious safety events with periodic confirmation of 
precursor and near miss events for consistency
•	
Establish a rapid review process for events that may need action to prevent further harm 
before a regularly scheduled process. Confirm if necessary, at next meeting
•	
When your SSER has sufficiently decreased, frequency can be adjusted, but no less frequently 
than monthly
Team Purpose and 
Responsibilities
1.	
Review and make final SEC® determinations for safety events.
2.	
Maintain the organization’s SSER® statistics and rate as well as tracking precursor and near 
miss events
3.	
Monitor organization for effective event reporting and consistent classification.
Decision Making
1.	
Classification decisions should be reached by consensus. If consensus not possible, then 
majority.
2.	
Each member of the team has a responsibility to participate in full and complete discussion 
about each case and to raise concerns if they disagree with the recommendations of the 
group.
3.	
If consensus cannot be reached, a vote can be taken (majority rules).
4.	
The classification decisions of the team will be considered final, unless new information comes 
to light that the team did not have available at the time the case was classified.
5.	
Members of the team are expected to support the full team’s decisions.
Appeal Process
In the event that an organizational leader disagrees with a safety event classification by the team, 
a senior leader such as the Chief Medical Officer, Chief Safety Officer, Chief Nursing Officer is 
designated as final arbitrator.

76
APPENDIX H
4.
Strive for Consistency 
and Team Effectiveness 
Organizations experienced in SEC® & SSER® suggest…
1.	
When adding ad hoc team members avoid the individuals involved in the event. Their 
participation is best used during cause analysis activities.
2.	
Defer the classification of events if there is insufficient information to make an informed 
decision. Come prepared with answers.
3.	
Consider keeping a secured table or spreadsheet which can be pre-populated with events 
and preliminary classifications by the data “owners” for efficient team functioning
4.	
Keep an organizational “Case Law” list of difficult to classify cases and issues. Refer to Case 
Law when considering similar cases. The HPI Press Ganey PSO can provide members a 
template to record deliberations.
•	 Details on how classification decisions were reached for the “tricky” cases.
•	 Document the source of the disagreement and the different opinions and why they were held.
•	 Keep track of the type of disagreement, i.e. Deviation from GAPS; Causation; Level of Harm.
•	 Also include cases that were deemed “not a safety event” 
5.	
Only with good event reporting statistics and team inter-rater reliability, can the percent of 
SSER reduction become a comparative metric between system facilities over time.
Don’t forget that membership in the HPI Press Ganey PSO provides an excellent source for 
support beyond your organization!!
©2006 Healthcare Performance Improvement, LLC
Was there a deviation from generally 
accepted performance standards?
Did the deviation reach the patient?
Did the deviation cause moderate to severe 
harm or death?
SERIOUS SAFETY EVENT
PRECURSOR SAFETY EVENT
NEAR-MISS SAFETY EVENT
NOT A SAFETY EVENT
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO

pressganey.com